<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>An Heroical Epistle of Hudibras to Sidrophel</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="an-heroical-epistle-of-hudibras-to-sidrophel" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title">An Heroical Epistle of Hudibras to Sidrophel</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph" xml:lang="la">
					<p>Ecce iterum Crispinus.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Well! Sidrophel, though ’tis in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tamper with your crazy brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without trepanning of your skull</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As often as the moon’s at full,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis not amiss, ere y’ are giv’n o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To try one desp’rate med’cine more:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For where your case can be no worse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The desperat’st is the wisest course.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is’t possible that you, whose ears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are of the tribe of Issachar’s,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And might (with equal reason) either</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For merit, or extent of leather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With William Pryn’s, before they were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Retrench’d and crucify’d, compare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shou’d yet be deaf against a noise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So roaring as the public voice?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That speaks your virtues free, and loud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And openly, in ev’ry crowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As loud as one that sings his part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>T’ a wheel-barrow or turnip cart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or your new nick-nam’d old invention</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cry green hastings with an engine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(As if the vehemence had stunn’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turn your drum-heads with the sound;)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ’cause your folly’s now no news,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But overgrown, and out of use,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Persuade yourself there’s no such matter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that ’tis vanish’d out of nature;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When folly, as it grows in years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The more extravagant appears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For who but you could be possest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With so much ignorance, and beast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That neither all mens’ scorn and hate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor being laugh’d and pointed at,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor bray’d so often in a mortar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can teach you wholesome sense and nurture;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But (like a reprobate) what course</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soever’s us’d, grow worse and worse?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can no transfusion of the blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That makes fools cattle, do you good?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor putting pigs t’ a bitch to nurse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To turn ’em into mongrel-curs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put you into a way, at least,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make yourself a better beast?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can all your critical intrigues</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of trying sound from rotten eggs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your several new-found remedies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of curing wounds and scabs in trees;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your arts of flexing them for claps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And purging their infected saps;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Recov’ring shankers, crystallines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nodes and botches in their rinds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have no effect to operate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon that duller block, your pate?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But still it must be lewdly bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tempt your own due punishment;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, like your whimsy’d chariots, draw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boys to course you without law;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if the art you have so long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Profess’d, of making old dogs young,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In you had virtue to renew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not only youth, but childhood too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can you, that understand all books,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By judging only with your looks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resolve all problems with your face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As others do with <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">B</i>’s and <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">A</i>’s;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unriddle all that mankind knows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With solid bending of your brows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All arts and sciences advance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With screwing of your countenance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, with a penetrating eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into th’ abstrusest learning pry?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Know more of any trade b’ a hint,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than those that have been bred up in’t;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet have no art, true or false,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To help your own bad naturals?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But still, the more you strive t’ appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are found to be the wretcheder:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For fools are known by looking wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As men find woodcocks by their eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence ’tis, that ’cause y’ have gain’d o’ th’ college</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A quarter share (at most) of knowledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brought in none, but spent repute,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Y’ assume a pow’r as absolute</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To judge, and censure, and control,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if you were the sole Sir Poll;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saucily pretend to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More than your dividend comes to.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’ll find the thing will not be done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With ignorance and face alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, though y’ have purchas’d to your name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In history, so great a fame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That now your talents, so well known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For having all belief out-grown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ev’ry strange prodigious tale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is measur’d by your German scale;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By which the virtuosi try</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The magnitude of ev’ry lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast up to what it does amount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And place the bigg’st to your account;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all those stories that are laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too truly to you, and those made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are now still charg’d upon your score,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lesser authors nam’d no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! that faculty betrays</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those soonest it designs to raise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all your vain renown will spoil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As guns o’ercharg’d the more recoil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though he that has but impudence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all things has a fair pretence;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And put among his wants but shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all the world may lay his claim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though you have try’d that nothing’s borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With greater ease than public scorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all affronts do still give place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To your impenetrable face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That makes your way through all affairs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As pigs through hedges creep with theirs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet as ’tis counterfeit and brass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You must not think ’twill always pass;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all impostors, when they’re known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are past their labour, and undone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the best that can befal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An artificial natural,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is that which madmen find, as soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As once they’re broke loose from the moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, proof against her influence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Relapse to e’er so little sense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To turn stark fools, and subjects fit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For sport of boys, and rabble wit.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
