<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>An Heroical Epistle of Hudibras to His Lady</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="an-heroical-epistle-of-hudibras-to-his-lady" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">An Heroical Epistle of Hudibras to His Lady</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>I who was once as great as CAESAR,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Am now reduc'd to NEBUCHADNEZZAR;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And from as fam'd a conqueror</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As ever took degree in war,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or did his exercise in battle,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By you turn'd out to grass with cattle:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For since I am deny'd access</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To all my earthly happiness</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Am fallen from the paradise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of your good graces, and fair eyes;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lost to the world, and you, I'm sent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To everlasting banishment;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where all the hopes I had t' have won</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your heart, b'ing dash'd, will break my own.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Yet if you were not so severe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To pass your doom before you hear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You'd find, upon my just defence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How much y' have wrong'd my innocence.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That once I made a vow to you,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which yet is unperformed, 'tis true:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But not because it is unpaid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>'Tis violated, though delay'd;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or, if it were, it is no fau't,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So heinous as you'd have it thought;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To undergo the loss of ears,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like vulgar hackney perjurers</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For there's a diff'rence in the case,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Between the noble and the base,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who always are observ'd t' have done't</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon as different an account:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The one for great and weighty cause,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To salve in honour ugly flaws;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For none are like to do it sooner</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than those who are nicest of their honour:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The other, for base gain and pay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forswear, and perjure by the day;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And make th' exposing and retailing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their souls and consciences a calling.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>It is no scandal, nor aspersion,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon a great and noble person,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To say he nat'rally abhorr'd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th' old-fashion'd trick, To keep his word;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though 'tis perfidiousness and shame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In meaner men to do the same:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For to be able to forget,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is found more useful to the great,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than gout, or deafness, or bad eyes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make 'em pass for wond'rous wise.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But though the law on perjurers</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Inflicts the forfeiture of ears,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It is not just that does exempt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The guilty, and punish th' innocent;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make the ears repair the wrong</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Committed by th' ungovern'd tongue;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when one member is forsworn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Another to be cropt or torn.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And if you shou'd, as you design,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By course of law, recover mine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You're like, if you consider right,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To gain but little honour by't.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For he that for his lady's sake</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lays down his life or limbs at stake,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Does not so much deserve her favour,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As he that pawns his soul to have her,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This y' have acknowledg'd I have done,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Although you now disdain to own;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But sentence what you rather ought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>T' esteem good service than a fau't.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Besides, oaths are not bound to bear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That literal sense the words infer,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, by the practice of the age,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are to be judg'd how far th' engage;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, where the sense by custom's checkt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are found void, and of none effect.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For no man takes or keeps a vow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But just as he sees others do;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor are th' oblig'd to be so brittle,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As not to yield and bow a little:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For as best-temper'd blades are found,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before they break, to bend quite round,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So truest oaths are still most tough,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And though they bow, are breaking proof.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then wherefore should they not b' allow'd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In love a greater latitude?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For as the law of arms approves</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All ways to conquest, so should love's;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And not be ty'd to true or false,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But make that justest that prevails</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For how can that which is above</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All empire, high and mighty love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Submit its great prerogative</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To any other power alive?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall love, that to no crown gives place,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Become the subject of a case?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The fundamental law of nature,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be over-rul'd by those made after?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Commit the censure of its cause</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To any but its own great laws?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Love, that's the world's preservative,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That keeps all souls of things alive;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Controuls the mighty pow'r of fate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And gives mankind a longer date;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The life of nature, that restores</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As fast as time and death devours;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To whose free-gift the world does owe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not only earth, but heaven too;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For love's the only trade that's driven,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The interest of state in heav'n,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which nothing but the soul of man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is capable to entertain.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For what can earth produce, but love</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To represent the joys above?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or who but lovers can converse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like angels, by the eye-discourse?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-211" id="noteref-211" epub:type="noteref">211</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Address and compliment by vision;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Make love and court by intuition?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And burn in amorous flames as fierce</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As those celestial ministers?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then how can any thing offend,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In order to so great an end?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or heav'n itself a sin resent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-212" id="noteref-212" epub:type="noteref">212</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>That for its own supply was meant?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That merits, in a kind mistake,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A pardon for th' offence's sake.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or if it did not, but the cause</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were left to th' injury at laws,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What tyranny can disapprove</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There should be equity in love;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For laws that are inanimate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And feel no sense of love or hate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That have no passion of their own,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor pity to be wrought upon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are only proper to inflict</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Revenge on criminals as strict</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But to have power to forgive,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is empire and prerogative;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And 'tis in crowns a nobler gem</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To grant a pardon than condemn.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then since so few do what they ought,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>'Tis great t' indulge a well-meant fau't.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For why should he who made address,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All humble ways, without success,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And met with nothing, in return,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But insolence, affronts, and scorn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not strive by wit to countermine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And bravely carry his design?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He who was us'd so unlike a soldier,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Blown up with philters of love-powder?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And after letting blood, and purging,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Condemn'd to voluntary scourging;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Alarm'd with many a horrid fright,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And claw'd by goblins in the night;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Insulted on, revil'd, and jeer'd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With rude invasion of his beard;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when your sex was foully scandal'd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As foully by the rabble handled;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Attack'd by despicable foes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And drub'd with mean and vulgar blows;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, after all, to be debarr'd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So much as standing on his guard;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When horses, being spurr'd and prick'd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have leave to kick for being kick'd?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Or why should you, whose mother-wits</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are furnish'd with all perquisites,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That with your breeding-teeth begin,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And nursing babies, that lie in,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>B' allow'd to put all tricks upon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our cully sex, and we use none?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We, who have nothing but frail vows</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against your stratagems t' oppose;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or oaths more feeble than your own,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By which we are no less put down?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You wound, like Parthians, while you fly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And kill with a retreating eye:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-213" id="noteref-213" epub:type="noteref">213</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Retire the more, the more we press</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To draw us into ambushes.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As pirates all false colours wear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>T' intrap th' unwary mariner,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So women, to surprise us, spread</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The borrow'd flags of white and red;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Display 'em thicker on their cheeks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than their old grandmothers, the Picts;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And raise more devils with their looks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than conjurer's less subtle books;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lay trains of amorous intrigues,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In tow'rs, and curls, and perriwigs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With greater art and cunning rear'd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than PHILIP NYE's thanksgiving beard,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-214" id="noteref-214" epub:type="noteref">214</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prepost'rously t' entice, and gain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those to adore 'em they disdain;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And only draw 'em in, to clog</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With idle names a catalogue.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>A lover is, the more he's brave,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>T' his mistress but the more a slave;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And whatsoever she commands,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Becomes a favour from her hands;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which he's obliged t' obey, and must,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether it be unjust or just.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then when he is compell'd by her</span>
						<br/>
						<span>T' adventures he would else forbear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who with his honour can withstand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Since force is greater than command?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when necessity's obey'd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nothing can be unjust or bad</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And therefore when the mighty pow'rs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of love, our great ally and yours,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Join'd forces not to be withstood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By frail enamour'd flesh and blood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All I have done, unjust or ill,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was in obedience to your will;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all the blame that can be due,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Falls to your cruelty and you.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor are those scandals I confest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against my will and interest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More than is daily done of course</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By all men, when they're under force;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When some upon the rack confess</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What th' hangman and their prompters please;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But are no sooner out of pain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than they deny it all again.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But when the Devil turns confessor,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Truth is a crime he takes no pleasure</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To hear, or pardon, like the founder</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of liars, whom they all claim under</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And therefore, when I told him none,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I think it was the wiser done.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor am I without precedent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The first that on th' adventure went</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All mankind ever did of course,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And daily dues the same, or worse.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For what romance can show a lover,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That had a lady to recover,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And did not steer a nearer course,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To fall a-board on his amours?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And what at first was held a crime,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Has turn'd to honourable in time.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To what a height did infant ROME,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-215" id="noteref-215" epub:type="noteref">215</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>By ravishing of women, come</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When men upon their spouses seiz'd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And freely marry'd where they pleas'd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They ne'er forswore themselves, nor ly'd.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor, in the mind they were in, dy'd;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor took the pains t' address and sue,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor play'd the masquerade to woo;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Disdain'd to stay for friends' consents;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor juggled about settlements:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did need no license, nor no priest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor friends, nor kindred, to assist;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor lawyers, to join land and money</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In th' holy state of matrimony,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before they settled hands and hearts,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till alimony or death them parts:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-216" id="noteref-216" epub:type="noteref">216</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor wou'd endure to stay until</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th' had got the very bride's good will;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But took a wise and shorter course</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To win the ladies, downright force.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And justly made 'em prisoners then,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As they have often since, us men,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With acting plays, and dancing jigs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The luckiest of all love's intrigues;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when they had them at their pleasure,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then talk'd of love and flames at leisure;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For after matrimony's over,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He that holds out but half a lover,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deserves for ev'ry minute more</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than half a year of love before;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For which the dames in contemplation</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of that best way of application,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prov'd nobler wives than e'er was known,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By suit or treaty to be won;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And such as all posterity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cou'd never equal nor come nigh.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>For women first were made for men,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not men for them. — It follows, then,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That men have right to ev'ry one,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And they no freedom of their own</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And therefore men have pow'r to chuse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But they no charter to refuse.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hence 'tis apparent, that what course</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Soe'er we take to your amours,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though by the indirectest way,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>'Tis no injustice, nor foul play;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that you ought to take that course,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As we take you, for better or worse;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And gratefully submit to those</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who you, before another, chose.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For why should ev'ry savage beast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Exceed his great lord's interest?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have freer pow'r than he in grace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And nature, o'er the creature has?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because the laws he since has made</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have cut off all the pow'r he had;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Retrench'd the absolute dominion</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That nature gave him over women;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When all his pow'r will not extend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One law of nature to suspend;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And but to offer to repeal</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The smallest clause, is to rebel.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This, if men rightly understood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their privilege, they wou'd make good;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And not, like sots, permit their wives</span>
						<br/>
						<span>T' encroach on their prerogatives;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For which sin they deserve to be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Kept, as they are, in slavery:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And this some precious Gifted Teachers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unrev'rently reputed leachers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And disobey'd in making love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have vow'd to all the world to prove,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And make ye suffer, as you ought,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For that uncharitable fau't.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But I forget myself, and rove</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beyond th' instructions of my love.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Forgive me (Fair) and only blame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th' extravagancy of my flame,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Since 'tis too much at once to show</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Excess of love and temper too.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All I have said that's bad and true,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was never meant to aim at you,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who have so sov'reign a controul</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O'er that poor slave of yours, my soul,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That, rather than to forfeit you,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Has ventur'd loss of heaven too:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both with an equal pow'r possest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To render all that serve you blest:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But none like him, who's destin'd either</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To have, or lose you, both together.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And if you'll but this fault release</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(For so it must be, since you please)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I'll pay down all that vow, and more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which you commanded, and I swore,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And expiate upon my skin</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th' arrears in full of all my sin.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For 'tis but just that I should pay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th' accruing penance for delay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which shall be done, until it move</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your equal pity and your love.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The Knight, perusing this Epistle,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Believ'd h' had brought her to his whistle;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And read it like a jocund lover,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With great applause t' himself, twice over;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Subscrib'd his name, but at a fit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And humble distance to his wit;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And dated it with wond'rous art,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Giv'n from the bottom of his heart;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then seal'd it with his Coat of Love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A smoaking faggot — and above,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon a scroll — I burn, and weep;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And near it — For her Ladyship;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all her sex most excellent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These to her gentle hands present.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then gave it to his faithful Squire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With lessons how t' observe and eye her.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>She first consider'd which was better,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To send it back, or burn the letter.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But guessing that it might import,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though nothing else, at least her sport,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She open'd it, and read it out,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With many a smile and leering flout:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Resolv'd to answer it in kind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thus perform'd what she design'd.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
