<h3 id="id00044" style="margin-top: 3em">PART I</h3>

<h4 id="id00045" style="margin-top: 2em">CANTO I</h4>

<h4 id="id00046" style="margin-top: 2em">THE ARGUMENT</h4>

<p id="id00047">————————————————————————-<br/>

Sir Hudibras his passing worth,<br/>

The manner how he sallied forth;<br/>

His arms and equipage are shown;<br/>

His horse's virtues, and his own.<br/>

Th' adventure of the bear and fiddle<br/>

Is sung, but breaks off in the middle.<br/>

————————————————————————-<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00048" style="margin-top: 2em">When civil dudgeon &lt;a&gt; first grew high,<br/>

And men fell out they knew not why?<br/>

When hard words, jealousies, and fears,<br/>

Set folks together by the ears,<br/>

And made them fight, like mad or drunk,                         5<br/>

For Dame Religion, as for punk;<br/>

Whose honesty they all durst swear for,<br/>

Though not a man of them knew wherefore:<br/>

When Gospel-Trumpeter, surrounded<br/>

With long-ear'd rout, to battle sounded,                       10<br/>

And pulpit, drum ecclesiastick,<br/>

Was beat with fist, instead of a stick;<br/>

Then did Sir Knight abandon dwelling,<br/>

And out he rode a colonelling.<br/>

A wight he was, whose very sight wou'd                         15<br/>

Entitle him Mirror of Knighthood;<br/>

That never bent his stubborn knee<br/>

To any thing but Chivalry;<br/>

Nor put up blow, but that which laid<br/>

Right worshipful on shoulder-blade;                            20<br/>

Chief of domestic knights and errant,<br/>

Either for cartel or for warrant;<br/>

Great on the bench, great in the saddle,<br/>

That &lt;b&gt; could as well bind o'er, as swaddle;<br/>

Mighty he was at both of these,                                25<br/>

And styl'd of war, as well as peace.<br/>

(So some rats, of amphibious nature,<br/>

Are either for the land or water).<br/>

But here our authors make a doubt<br/>

Whether he were more wise, or stout:                           30<br/>

Some hold the one, and some the other;<br/>

But howsoe'er they make a pother,<br/>

The diff'rence was so small, his brain<br/>

Outweigh'd his rage but half a grain;<br/>

Which made some take him for a tool                            35<br/>

That knaves do work with, call'd a fool,<br/>

And offer to lay wagers that<br/>

As MONTAIGNE, &lt;c&gt; playing with his cat,<br/>

Complains she thought him but an ass,<br/>

Much more she wou'd Sir HUDIBRAS;                              40<br/>

(For that's the name our valiant knight<br/>

To all his challenges did write).<br/>

But they're mistaken very much,<br/>

'Tis plain enough he was no such;<br/>

We grant, although he had much wit,                            45<br/>

H' was very shy of using it;<br/>

As being loth to wear it out,<br/>

And therefore bore it not about,<br/>

Unless on holy-days, or so,<br/>

As men their best apparel do.                                  50<br/>

Beside, 'tis known he could speak GREEK<br/>

As naturally as pigs squeek;<br/>

That LATIN was no more difficile,<br/>

Than to a blackbird 'tis to whistle:<br/>

Being rich in both, he never scanted                           55<br/>

His bounty unto such as wanted;<br/>

But much of either would afford<br/>

To many, that had not one word.<br/>

For Hebrew roots, although they're found<br/>

To flourish most in barren ground,                             60<br/>

He had such plenty, as suffic'd<br/>

To make some &lt;d&gt; think him circumcis'd;<br/>

And truly so,  he was, perhaps,<br/>

Not as a proselyte, but for claps.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00049">He was in LOGIC a great critic,                                65<br/>

Profoundly skill'd in &lt;e&gt; analytic;<br/>

He could distinguish, and divide<br/>

A hair 'twixt south, and south-west side:<br/>

On either which he would dispute,<br/>

Confute, change hands, and still confute,                      70<br/>

He'd undertake to prove, by force<br/>

Of argument, a man's no horse;<br/>

He'd prove a buzzard is no fowl,<br/>

And that a lord may be an owl,<br/>

A calf an alderman, a goose a justice,                         75<br/>

And rooks Committee-men and Trustees.<br/>

He'd run in debt by disputation,<br/>

And pay with ratiocination.<br/>

All this by syllogism, true<br/>

In mood and figure, he would do.                               80<br/>

For RHETORIC, he could not ope<br/>

His mouth, but out there flew a trope;<br/>

And when he happen'd to break off<br/>

I' th' middle of his speech, or cough,<br/>

H' had hard words,ready to show why,                           85<br/>

And tell what rules he did it by;<br/>

Else, when with greatest art he spoke,<br/>

You'd think he talk'd like other folk,<br/>

For all a rhetorician's rules<br/>

Teach nothing but to name his tools.                           90<br/>

His ordinary rate of speech<br/>

In loftiness of sound was rich;<br/>

A Babylonish &lt;f&gt;dialect,<br/>

Which learned pedants much affect.<br/>

It was a parti-colour'd dress                                  95<br/>

Of patch'd and pie-bald languages;<br/>

'Twas English cut on Greek and Latin,<br/>

Like fustian heretofore on satin;<br/>

It had an odd promiscuous tone,<br/>

As if h' had talk'd three parts in one;                       100<br/>

Which made some think, when he did gabble,<br/>

Th' had heard three labourers of Babel;<br/>

Or &lt;g&gt; CERBERUS himself pronounce<br/>

A leash of languages at once.<br/>

This he as volubly would vent                                 105<br/>

As if his stock would ne'er be spent:<br/>

And truly, to support that charge,<br/>

He had supplies as vast and large;<br/>

For he cou'd coin, or counterfeit<br/>

New words, with little or no wit:                             110<br/>

Words so debas'd and hard, no stone<br/>

Was hard enough to touch them on;<br/>

And when with hasty noise he spoke 'em,<br/>

The ignorant for current took 'em;<br/>

That had the &lt;h&gt; orator, who once                             115<br/>

Did fill his mouth with pebble stones<br/>

When he harangu'd, but known his phrase<br/>

He would have us'd no other ways.<br/>

In MATHEMATICKS he was greater<br/>

Than &lt;i&gt; TYCHO BRAHE, or ERRA PATER:                          120<br/>

For he, by geometric scale,<br/>

Could take the size of pots of ale;<br/>

Resolve, by sines and tangents straight,<br/>

If bread or butter wanted weight,<br/>

And wisely tell what hour o' th' day                          125<br/>

The clock does strike by algebra.<br/>

Beside, he was a shrewd PHILOSOPHER,<br/>

And had read ev'ry text and gloss over;<br/>

Whate'er the crabbed'st author hath,<br/>

He understood b' implicit faith:                              130<br/>

Whatever &lt;k&gt; sceptic could inquire for,<br/>

For ev'ry why he had a wherefore;<br/>

Knew more than forty of them do,<br/>

As far as words and terms cou'd go.<br/>

All which he understood by rote,                              135<br/>

And, as occasion serv'd, would quote;<br/>

No matter whether right or wrong,<br/>

They might be either said or sung.<br/>

His notions fitted things so well,<br/>

That which was which he could not tell;                       140<br/>

But oftentimes mistook th' one<br/>

For th' other, as great clerks have done.<br/>

He could &lt;l&gt; reduce all things to acts,<br/>

And knew their natures by abstracts;<br/>

Where entity and quiddity,                                    145<br/>

The ghosts of defunct bodies fly;<br/>

Where &lt;m&gt; truth in person does appear,<br/>

Like words &lt;n&gt; congeal'd in northern air.<br/>

He knew what's what, and that's as high<br/>

As metaphysic wit can fly;                                    150<br/>

In school-divinity as able<br/>

As &lt;o&gt; he that hight, Irrefragable;<br/>

A second &lt;p&gt; THOMAS, or, at once,<br/>

To name them all, another DUNCE:<br/>

Profound in all the Nominal                                   155<br/>

And Real ways, beyond them all:<br/>

For he a rope of sand cou'd twist<br/>

As &lt;q&gt; tough as learned SORBONIST;<br/>

And weave fine cobwebs, fit for skull<br/>

That's empty when the moon is full;                           160<br/>

Such as take lodgings in a head<br/>

That's to be let unfurnished.<br/>

He could raise scruples dark and nice,<br/>

And after solve 'em in a trice;<br/>

As if Divinity had catch'd                                    165<br/>

The itch, on purpose to be scratch'd;<br/>

Or, like a mountebank, did wound<br/>

And stab herself with doubts profound,<br/>

Only to show with how small pain<br/>

The sores of Faith are cur'd again;                           170<br/>

Although by woeful proof we find,<br/>

They always leave a scar behind.<br/>

He knew &lt;r&gt; the seat of Paradise,<br/>

Could tell in what degree it lies;<br/>

And, as he was dispos'd, could prove it,                      175<br/>

Below the moon, or else above it.<br/>

What Adam dreamt of, when his bride<br/>

Came from her closet in his side:<br/>

Whether the devil tempted her<br/>

By a &lt;s&gt; High Dutch interpreter;                              180<br/>

If either of them &lt;t&gt; had a navel:<br/>

Who first &lt;u&gt; made music malleable:<br/>

Whether the serpent, at the fall,<br/>

Had cloven feet, or none at all.<br/>

All this, without a gloss, or comment,                        185<br/>

He could unriddle in a moment,<br/>

In proper terms, such as men smatter<br/>

When they throw out, and miss the matter.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00050">For his Religion, it was fit<br/>

To match his learning and his wit;                            190<br/>

'Twas Presbyterian true blue;<br/>

For he was of that stubborn crew<br/>

Of errant saints, whom all men grant<br/>

To be the true Church Militant;<br/>

Such as do build their faith upon                             195<br/>

The holy text of pike and gun;<br/>

Decide all controversies by<br/>

Infallible artillery;<br/>

And prove their doctrine orthodox<br/>

By apostolic blows and knocks;                                200<br/>

Call fire and sword and desolation,<br/>

A godly thorough reformation,<br/>

Which always must be carried on,<br/>

And still be doing, never done;<br/>

As if religion were intended                                  205<br/>

For nothing else but to be mended.<br/>

A sect, whose chief devotion lies<br/>

In odd perverse antipathies;<br/>

In falling out with that or this,<br/>

And finding somewhat still amiss;                             210<br/>

More peevish, cross, and splenetick,<br/>

Than dog distract, or monkey sick.<br/>

That with more care keep holy-day<br/>

The wrong, than others the right way;<br/>

Compound for sins they are inclin'd to,                       215<br/>

By damning those they have no mind to:<br/>

Still so perverse and opposite,<br/>

As if they worshipp'd God for spite.<br/>

The self-same thing they will abhor<br/>

One way, and long another for.                                220<br/>

Free-will they one way disavow,<br/>

Another, nothing else allow:<br/>

All piety consists therein<br/>

In them, in other men all sin:<br/>

Rather than fail, they will defy                              225<br/>

That which they love most tenderly;<br/>

Quarrel with minc'd-pies, and disparage<br/>

Their best and dearest friend, plum-porridge;<br/>

Fat pig and goose itself oppose,<br/>

And blaspheme custard through the nose.                       230<br/>

Th' apostles of this fierce religion,<br/>

Like MAHOMET'S, &lt;w&gt; were ass and pidgeon,<br/>

To whom our knight, by fast instinct<br/>

Of wit and temper, was so linkt,<br/>

As if hypocrisy and nonsense                                  235<br/>

Had got th' advowson of his conscience.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00051">Thus was he gifted and accouter'd;<br/>

We mean on th' inside, not the outward;<br/>

That next of all we shall discuss:<br/>

Then listen, Sirs, it follows thus                            240<br/>

His tawny beard was th' equal grace<br/>

Both of his wisdom and his face;<br/>

In cut and dye so like a tile,<br/>

A sudden view it would beguile:<br/>

The upper part thereof was whey;                              245<br/>

The nether, orange mix'd with grey.<br/>

This hairy meteor did denounce<br/>

The fall of scepters and of crowns;<br/>

With grisly type did represent<br/>

Declining age of government;                                  250<br/>

And tell with hieroglyphick spade,<br/>

Its own grave and the state's were made.<br/>

Like SAMPSON'S heart-breakers, it grew<br/>

In time to make a nation rue;<br/>

Tho' it contributed its own fall,                             255<br/>

To wait upon the publick downfal,<br/>

It was &lt;x&gt; monastick, and did grow<br/>

In holy orders by strict vow;<br/>

Of rule as sullen and severe<br/>

As that of rigid Cordeliere.                                  260<br/>

'Twas bound to suffer persecution<br/>

And martyrdom with resolution;<br/>

T' oppose itself against the hate<br/>

And vengeance of th' incensed state;<br/>

In whose defiance it was worn,                                265<br/>

Still ready to be pull'd and torn;<br/>

With red-hot irons to be tortur'd;<br/>

Revil'd, and spit upon, and martyr'd.<br/>

Maugre all which, 'twas to stand fast<br/>

As long as monarchy shou'd last;                              270<br/>

But when the state should hap to reel,<br/>

'Twas to submit to fatal steel,<br/>

And fall, as it was consecrate,<br/>

A sacrifice to fall of state;<br/>

Whose thread of life the fatal sisters                        275<br/>

Did twist together with its whiskers,<br/>

And twine so close, that time should never,<br/>

In life or death, their fortunes sever;<br/>

But with his rusty sickle mow<br/>

Both down together at a blow.                                 280<br/>

So learned TALIACOTIUS &lt;y&gt; from<br/>

The brawny part of porter's bum<br/>

Cut supplemental noses, which<br/>

Wou'd last as long as parent breech;<br/>

But when the date of NOCK was out,                            285<br/>

Off drop'd the sympathetic snout.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00052">His back, or rather burthen, show'd,<br/>

As if it stoop'd with its own load:<br/>

For as AENEAS &lt;z&gt;bore his sire<br/>

Upon his shoulders thro' the fire,                            290<br/>

Our Knight did bear no less a pack<br/>

Of his own buttocks on his back;<br/>

Which now had almost got the upper-<br/>

Hand of his head, for want of crupper.<br/>

To poise this equally, he bore                                295<br/>

A paunch of the same bulk before;<br/>

Which still he had a special care<br/>

To keep well-cramm'd with thrifty fare;<br/>

As white-pot, butter-milk, and curds,<br/>

Such as a country-house affords;                              300<br/>

With other vittle, which anon<br/>

We farther shall dilate upon,<br/>

When of his hose we come to treat,<br/>

The cupboard where he kept his meat.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00053">His doublet was of sturdy buff,                               305<br/>

And tho' not sword, yet cudgel-proof;<br/>

Whereby 'twas fitter for his use,<br/>

Who fear'd no blows, but such as bruise.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00054">His breeches were of rugged woollen,<br/>

And had been at the siege of Bullen;                          310<br/>

To old King HARRY so well known,<br/>

Some writers held they were his own.<br/>

Thro' they were lin'd with many a piece<br/>

Of ammunition bread and cheese,<br/>

And fat black-puddings, proper food                           315<br/>

For warriors that delight in blood.<br/>

For, as we said, he always chose<br/>

To carry vittle in his hose,<br/>

That often tempted rats and mice<br/>

The ammunition to surprise:                                   320<br/>

And when he put a hand but in<br/>

The one or t' other magazine,<br/>

They stoutly in defence on't stood,<br/>

And from the wounded foe drew blood;<br/>

And 'till th' were storm'd and beaten out,                    325<br/>

Ne'er left the fortify'd redoubt.<br/>

And tho' Knights Errant, as some think,<br/>

Of old did neither eat nor drink,<br/>

Because, when thorough desarts vast,<br/>

And regions desolate, they past,                              330<br/>

Where belly-timber above ground,<br/>

Or under, was not to be found,<br/>

Unless they graz'd, there's not one word<br/>

Of their provision on record;<br/>

Which made some confidently write,                            335<br/>

They had no stomachs, but to fight.<br/>

'Tis false: for &lt;a&gt; ARTHUR wore in hall<br/>

Round table like a farthingal,<br/>

On which with shirt pull'd out behind,<br/>

And eke before, his good Knights din'd.                       340<br/>

Though 'twas no table, some suppose,<br/>

But a huge pair of round trunk hose;<br/>

In which he carry'd as much meat<br/>

As he and all the Knights cou'd eat,<br/>

When, laying by their swords and truncheons,                  345<br/>

They took their breakfasts, or their nuncheons.<br/>

But let that pass at present, lest<br/>

We should forget where we digrest,<br/>

As learned authors use, to whom<br/>

We leave it, and to th' purpose come,                         350<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00055">His puissant sword unto his side,<br/>

Near his undaunted heart, was ty'd;<br/>

With basket-hilt, that wou'd hold broth,<br/>

And serve for fight and dinner both.<br/>

In it he melted lead for bullets,                             355<br/>

To shoot at foes, and sometimes pullets,<br/>

To whom he bore so fell a grutch,<br/>

He ne'er gave quarter t' any such.<br/>

The trenchant blade, &lt;b&gt; Toledo trusty,<br/>

For want of fighting, was grown rusty,                        360<br/>

And ate unto itself, for lack<br/>

Of somebody to hew and hack.<br/>

The peaceful scabbard where it dwelt<br/>

The rancour of its edge had felt;<br/>

For of the lower end two handful                              365<br/>

It had devour'd, 'twas so manful;<br/>

And so much scorn'd to lurk in case,<br/>

As if it durst not shew its face.<br/>

In many desperate attempts,<br/>

Of warrants, exigents, contempts,                             370<br/>

It had appear'd with courage bolder<br/>

Than Serjeant BUM invading shoulder.<br/>

Oft had it ta'en possession,<br/>

And pris'ners too, or made them run.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00056">This sword a dagger had t' his page,                          375<br/>

That was but little for his age;<br/>

And therefore waited on him so,<br/>

As dwarfs upon Knights Errant do.<br/>

It was a serviceable dudgeon,<br/>

Either for fighting or for drudging.                          380<br/>

When it had stabb'd, or broke a head,<br/>

It would scrape trenchers, or chip bread;<br/>

Toast cheese or bacon; tho' it were<br/>

To bait a mouse-trap, 'twould not care.<br/>

'Twould make clean shoes; and in the earth                    385<br/>

Set leeks and onions, and so forth.<br/>

It had been 'prentice to a brewer,<br/>

Where this and more it did endure;<br/>

But left the trade, &lt;c&gt; as many more<br/>

Have lately done on the same score.                           390<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00057">In th' holsters, at his saddle-bow,<br/>

Two aged pistols he did stow,<br/>

Among the surplus of such meat<br/>

As in his hose he cou'd not get.<br/>

These wou'd inveigle rats with th' scent,                     395<br/>

To forage when the cocks were bent;<br/>

And sometimes catch 'em with a snap<br/>

As cleverly as th' ablest trap.<br/>

They were upon hard duty still,<br/>

And ev'ry night stood centinel,                               400<br/>

To guard the magazine i' th' hose<br/>

From two-legg'd and from four-legg'd foes.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00058">Thus clad and fortify'd, Sir Knight<br/>

From peaceful home set forth to fight.<br/>

But first with nimble, active force                           405<br/>

He got on th' outside of his horse;<br/>

For having but one stirrup ty'd<br/>

T' his saddle, on the further side,<br/>

It was so short, h' had much ado<br/>

To reach it with his desp'rate toe:                           410<br/>

But, after many strains and heaves,<br/>

He got up to the saddle-eaves,<br/>

From whence he vaulted into th' seat,<br/>

With so much vigour, strength and heat,<br/>

That he had almost tumbled over                               415<br/>

With his own weight, but did recover,<br/>

By laying hold on tail and main,<br/>

Which oft he us'd instead of rein.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00059">But now we talk of mounting steed,<br/>

Before we further do proceed,                                 420<br/>

It doth behoves us to say something<br/>

Of that which bore our valiant bumkin.<br/>

The beast was sturdy, large, and tall,<br/>

With mouth of meal, and eyes of wall.<br/>

I wou'd say eye; for h' had but one,                          425<br/>

As most agree; tho' some say none.<br/>

He was well stay'd; and in his gait<br/>

Preserv'd a grave, majestick state.<br/>

At spur or switch no more he skipt,<br/>

Or mended pace, than Spaniard whipt;                          430<br/>

And yet so fiery, he wou'd bound<br/>

As if he griev'd to touch the ground:<br/>

That CAESAR's horse &lt;d&gt;, who, as fame goes<br/>

Had corns upon his feet and toes,<br/>

Was not by half so tender hooft,                              435<br/>

Nor trod upon the ground so soft.<br/>

And as that beast would kneel and stoop<br/>

(Some write) to take his rider up,<br/>

So HUDIBRAS his ('tis well known)<br/>

Wou'd often do to set him down.                               440<br/>

We shall not need to say what lack<br/>

Of leather was upon his back;<br/>

For that was hidden under pad,<br/>

And breech of Knight, gall'd full as bad.<br/>

His strutting ribs on both sides show'd                       445<br/>

Like furrows he himself had plow'd;<br/>

For underneath the skirt of pannel,<br/>

'Twixt ev'ry two there was a channel<br/>

His draggling tail hung in the dirt,<br/>

Which on his rider he wou'd flurt,                            450<br/>

Still as his tender side he prick'd,<br/>

With arm'd heel, or with unarm'd kick'd:<br/>

For HUDIBRAS wore but one spur;<br/>

As wisely knowing, cou'd he stir<br/>

To active trot one side of's horse,                           455<br/>

The other wou'd not hang an arse.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00060">A squire he had, whose name was RALPH,<br/>

That in th' adventure went his half:<br/>

Though writers, for more stately tone,<br/>

Do call him RALPHO; 'tis all one;                             460<br/>

And when we can with metre safe,<br/>

We'll call him so; if not, plain RALPH:<br/>

(For rhyme the rudder is of verses,<br/>

With which like ships they steer their courses.)<br/>

An equal stock of wit and valour                              465<br/>

He had laid in; by birth a taylor.<br/>

The mighty Tyrian Queen, &lt;e&gt; that gain'd<br/>

With subtle shreds a tract of land,<br/>

Did leave it with a castle fair<br/>

To his great ancestor, her heir.                              470<br/>

From him descended cross-legg'd Knights,<br/>

Fam'd for their faith, and warlike fights<br/>

Against the bloody cannibal,<br/>

Whom they destroy'd both great and small.<br/>

This sturdy Squire, he had, as well                           475<br/>

As the &lt;f&gt; bold Trojan Knight, seen Hell;<br/>

Not with a counterfeited pass<br/>

Of golden bough, but true gold-lace.<br/>

His knowledge was not far behind<br/>

The Knight's, but of another kind,                            480<br/>

And he another way came by 't:<br/>

Some call it GIFTS, and some NEW-LIGHT;<br/>

A liberal art, that costs no pains<br/>

Of study, industry, or brains.<br/>

His wit was sent him for a token,                             485<br/>

But in the carriage crack'd and broken.<br/>

Like commendation nine-pence crook'd,<br/>

With — To and from my love — it look'd.<br/>

He ne'er consider'd it, as loth<br/>

To look a gift-horse in the mouth;                            490<br/>

And very wisely wou'd lay forth<br/>

No more upon it than 'twas worth.<br/>

But as he got it freely, so<br/>

He spent it frank and freely too.<br/>

For Saints themselves will sometimes be                       495<br/>

Of gifts, that cost them nothing, free.<br/>

By means of this, with hem and cough,<br/>

Prolongers to enlighten'd stuff,<br/>

He cou'd deep mysteries unriddle<br/>

As easily as thread a needle.                                 500<br/>

For as of vagabonds we say,<br/>

That they are ne'er beside their way;<br/>

Whate'er men speak by this New Light,<br/>

Still they are sure to be i' th' right.<br/>

'Tis a dark-lanthorn of the Spirit,                           505<br/>

Which none see by but those that bear it:<br/>

A light that falls down from on high,<br/>

For spiritual trades to cozen by<br/>

An Ignis Fatuus, that bewitches<br/>

And leads men into pools and ditches,                         510<br/>

To make them dip themselves, and sound<br/>

For Christendom in dirty pond<br/>

To dive like wild-fowl for salvation,<br/>

And fish to catch regeneration.<br/>

This light inspires and plays upon                            515<br/>

The nose of Saint like bag-pipe drone,<br/>

And speaks through hollow empty soul,<br/>

As through a trunk, or whisp'ring hole,<br/>

Such language as no mortal ear<br/>

But spirit'al eaves-droppers can hear:                        520<br/>

So PHOEBUS, or some friendly muse,<br/>

Into small poets song infuse,<br/>

Which they at second-hand rehearse,<br/>

Thro' reed or bag-pipe, verse for verse.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00061">Thus RALPH became infallible                                  525<br/>

As &lt;g&gt; three or four-legg'd oracle,<br/>

The ancient cup, or modern chair;<br/>

Spoke truth point-blank, tho' unaware.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00062">For MYSTICK LEARNING, wond'rous able<br/>

In &lt;h&gt; magick Talisman and Cabal,                             530<br/>

Whose primitive tradition reaches<br/>

As far &lt;i&gt; as ADAM'S first green breeches:<br/>

Deep-sighted in intelligences,<br/>

Ideas, atoms, influences;<br/>

And much of Terra Incognita, &lt;&gt;                               535<br/>

Th' intelligible world, cou'd say:<br/>

A deep OCCULT PHILOSOPHER,<br/>

As learn'd &lt;k&gt; as the wild Irish are,<br/>

Or Sir AGRIPPA &lt;l&gt;; for profound<br/>

And solid lying much renown'd.                                540<br/>

He &lt;m&gt; ANTHROPOSOPHUS, and FLOUD,<br/>

And JACOB BEHMEN understood:<br/>

Knew many an amulet and charm,<br/>

That wou'd do neither good nor harm:<br/>

In ROSY-CRUCIAN &lt;n&gt; lore as learned,                          545<br/>

As he that Vere adeptus earned.<br/>

He understood the speech of birds<br/>

As well as they themselves do words;<br/>

Cou'd tell what subtlest parrots mean,<br/>

That speak, and think contrary clean:                         550<br/>

What Member 'tis of whom they talk,<br/>

When they cry, Rope, and walk, knave, walk.<br/>

He'd extract numbers out of matter,<br/>

And keep them in a glass, like water;<br/>

Of sov'reign pow'r to make men wise;                          555<br/>

For drop'd in blear thick-sighted eyes,<br/>

They'd make them see in darkest night<br/>

Like owls, tho' purblind in the light.<br/>

By help of these (as he profess'd)<br/>

He had First Matter seen undress'd:                           560<br/>

He took her naked all alone,<br/>

Before one rag of form was on.<br/>

The Chaos too he had descry'd,<br/>

And seen quite thro', or else he ly'd:<br/>

Not that of paste-board which men shew                        565<br/>

For groats, at fair of Barthol'mew;<br/>

But its great grandsire, first o' the name,<br/>

Whence that and REFORMATION came;<br/>

Both cousin-germans, and right able<br/>

T' inveigle and draw in the rabble.                           570<br/>

But Reformation was, some say,<br/>

O' th' younger house to Puppet-play.<br/>

He cou'd foretel whats'ever was<br/>

By consequence to come to pass;<br/>

As death of great men, alterations,                           575<br/>

Diseases, battles, inundations.<br/>

All this, without th' eclipse o' th' sun,<br/>

Or dreadful comet, he hath done,<br/>

By inward light; away as good,<br/>

And easy to be understood;                                    580<br/>

But with more lucky hit than those<br/>

That use to make the stars depose,<br/>

Like Knights o' th' post, and falsely charge<br/>

Upon themselves what others forge:<br/>

As if they were consenting to                                 585<br/>

All mischiefs in the world men do:<br/>

Or, like the Devil, did tempt and sway 'em<br/>

To rogueries, and then betray 'em.<br/>

They'll search a planet's house, to know<br/>

Who broke and robb'd a house below:                           590<br/>

Examine VENUS, and the MOON,<br/>

Who stole a thimble or a spoon;<br/>

And tho' they nothing will confess,<br/>

Yet by their very looks can guess,<br/>

And tell what guilty aspect bodes,                            595<br/>

Who stole, and who receiv'd the goods.<br/>

They'll question MARS, and, by his look,<br/>

Detect who 'twas that nimm'd a cloke:<br/>

Make MERCURY confess, and 'peach<br/>

Those thieves which he himself did teach.                     600<br/>

They'll find, i' th' physiognomies<br/>

O' th' planets, all men's destinies.;<br/>

Like him that took the doctor's bill,<br/>

And swallow'd it instead o' th' pill<br/>

Cast the nativity o' th' question,                            605<br/>

And from positions to be guess'd on,<br/>

As sure as it' they knew the moment<br/>

Of natives birth, tell what will come on't.<br/>

They'll feel the pulses of the stars,<br/>

To find out agues, coughs, catarrhs;                          610<br/>

And tell what crisis does divine<br/>

The rot in sheep, or mange in swine<br/>

In men, what gives or cures the itch;<br/>

What makes them cuckolds, poor or rich;<br/>

What gains or loses, hangs or saves;                          615<br/>

What makes men great, what fools or knaves,<br/>

But not what wise; for only of those<br/>

The stars (they say) cannot dispose,<br/>

No more than can the Astrologians.<br/>

There they say right, and like true Trojans.<br/>

This RALPHO knew, and therefore took                          620<br/>

The other course, of which we spoke.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00063">Thus was the accomplish'd Squire endu'd<br/>

With gifts and knowledge, per'lous shrew'd.<br/>

Never did trusty Squire with Knight,<br/>

Or Knight with Squire, e'er jump more right.                  625<br/>

Their arms and equipage did fit,<br/>

As well as virtues, parts, and wit.<br/>

Their valours too were of a rate;<br/>

And out they sally'd at the gate.                             630<br/>

Few miles on horseback had they jogged,<br/>

But Fortune unto them turn'd dogged;<br/>

For they a sad adventure met,<br/>

Of which anon we mean to treat;<br/>

But ere we venture to unfold                                  635<br/>

Atchievements so resolv'd and bold,<br/>

We shou'd as learned poets use,<br/>

Invoke th' assistance of some muse:<br/>

However, criticks count it sillier<br/>

Than jugglers talking to familiar.                            640<br/>

We think 'tis no great matter which<br/>

They're all alike; yet we shall pitch<br/>

On one that fits our purpose most<br/>

Whom therefore thus do we accost:<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00064">Thou that with ale, or viler liquors,                         645<br/>

Did'st inspire WITHERS, PRYN &lt;o&gt;, and VICKARS,<br/>

And force them, tho' it was in spite<br/>

Of nature and their stars, to write;<br/>

Who, as we find in sullen writs,<br/>

And cross-grain'd works of modern wits,                       650<br/>

With vanity, opinion, want,<br/>

The wonder of the ignorant,<br/>

The praises of the author, penn'd<br/>

B' himself, or wit-insuring friend;<br/>

The itch of picture in the front,                             655<br/>

With bays and wicked rhyme upon't;<br/>

All that is left o' th' forked hill,<br/>

To make men scribble without skill;<br/>

Canst make a poet spite of fate,<br/>

And teach all people to translate,                            660<br/>

Tho' out of languages in which<br/>

They understand no part of speech;<br/>

Assist me but this once, I 'mplore,<br/>

And I shall trouble thee no more.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00065">In western clime there is a town,                             665<br/>

To those that dwell therein well known;<br/>

Therefore there needs no more be said here,<br/>

We unto them refer our reader;<br/>

For brevity is very good,<br/>

When w' are, or are not, understood.                          670<br/>

To this town people did repair,<br/>

On days of market, or of fair,<br/>

And, to crack'd fiddle, and hoarse tabor,<br/>

In merriment did drudge and labor.<br/>

But now a sport more formidable                               675<br/>

Had rak'd together village rabble:<br/>

'Twas an old way of recreating,<br/>

Which learned butchers call bear-baiting:<br/>

A bold advent'rous exercise,<br/>

With ancient heroes in high prize:                            680<br/>

For authors do affirm it came<br/>

From Isthmian or Nemean game:<br/>

Others derive it from the bear<br/>

That's fix'd in northern hemisphere,<br/>

And round about the pole does make                            685<br/>

A circle like a bear at stake,<br/>

That at the chain's end wheels about,<br/>

And overturns the rabble-rout.<br/>

For after solemn proclamation,<br/>

In the bear's name, (as is the fashion,                       690<br/>

According to the law of arms,<br/>

To keep men from inglorious harms,)<br/>

That none presume to come so near<br/>

As forty foot of stake of bear,<br/>

If any yet be so fool-hardy,                                  695<br/>

T' expose themselves to vain jeopardy,<br/>

If they come wounded off, and lame,<br/>

No honour's got by such a maim;<br/>

Altho' the bear gain much, b'ing bound<br/>

In honour to make good his ground,                            700<br/>

When he's engag'd, and takes no notice,<br/>

If any press upon him, who 'tis;<br/>

But let's them know, at their own cost,<br/>

That he intends to keep his post.<br/>

This to prevent, and other harms,                             705<br/>

Which always wait on feats of arms,<br/>

(For in the hurry of a fray<br/>

'Tis hard to keep out of harm's way,)<br/>

Thither the Knight his course did steer,<br/>

To keep the peace 'twixt dog and bear;                        710<br/>

As he believ'd he was bound to do<br/>

In conscience, and commission too;<br/>

And therefore thus bespoke the Squire.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00066">We that &lt;p&gt; are wisely mounted higher<br/>

Than constables in curule wit,<br/>

When on tribunal bench we sit,<br/>

Like speculators shou'd foresee,<br/>

From Pharos of authority,<br/>

Portended mischiefs farther then<br/>

Low Proletarian tything-men:                                  720<br/>

And therefore being inform'd by bruit,<br/>

That dog and bear are to dispute;<br/>

For so of late men fighting name,<br/>

Because they often prove the same;<br/>

(For where the first does hap to be,                          725<br/>

The last does coincidere;)<br/>

Quantum in nobis, have thought good,<br/>

To save th' expence of Christian blood,<br/>

And try if we, by mediation<br/>

Of treaty and accommodation,                                  730<br/>

Can end the quarrel and compose<br/>

The bloody duel without blows.<br/>

Are not our liberties, our lives,<br/>

The laws, religion and our wives,<br/>

Enough at once to lie at stake                                735<br/>

For Cov'nant and the Cause's sake?<br/>

But in that quarrel dogs and bears,<br/>

As well as we must venture theirs<br/>

This feud, by Jesuits invented,<br/>

By evil counsel is fomented:                                  740<br/>

There is a MACHIAVILIAN plot,<br/>

(Tho' ev'ry Nare olfact is not,)<br/>

A deep design in't, to divide<br/>

The well-affected that confide,<br/>

By setting brother against brother,                           745<br/>

To claw and curry one another.<br/>

Have we not enemies plus satis,<br/>

That Cane &amp; Angue pejus hate us?<br/>

And shall we turn our fangs and claws<br/>

Upon our own selves, without cause?                           750<br/>

That some occult design doth lie<br/>

In bloody &lt;q&gt; cynarctomachy,<br/>

Is plain enough to him that knows<br/>

How Saints lead brothers by the nose.<br/>

I wish myself a pseudo-prophet,                               755<br/>

But sure some mischief will come of it;<br/>

Unless by providential wit,<br/>

Or force, we &lt;r&gt; averruncate it.<br/>

For what design, what interest,<br/>

Can beast have to encounter beast?                            760<br/>

They fight for no espoused cause,<br/>

Frail privilege, fundamental laws,<br/>

Not for a thorough reformation,<br/>

Nor covenant, nor protestation,<br/>

Nor liberty of consciences,                                   765<br/>

Nor Lords and Commons ordinances;<br/>

Nor for the church, nor for church-lands,<br/>

To get them in their own no hands;<br/>

Nor evil counsellors to bring<br/>

To justice that seduce the King;                              770<br/>

Nor for the worship of us men,<br/>

Though we have done as much for them.<br/>

Th' AEgyptians worshipp'd dogs, and for<br/>

Their faith made internecine war.<br/>

Others ador'd a rat, and some                                 775<br/>

For that church suffer'd martyrdom.<br/>

The &lt;s&gt; Indians fought for the truth<br/>

Of th' elephant and monkey's tooth,<br/>

And many, to defend that faith,<br/>

Fought it out mordicus to death.                              780<br/>

But no beast ever was so slight,<br/>

For man, as for his God, to fight.<br/>

They have more wit, alas! and know<br/>

Themselves and us better than so.<br/>

But we, who only do infuse                                    785<br/>

The rage in them like &lt;t&gt; Boute-feus;<br/>

'Tis our example that instils<br/>

In them th' infection of our ills.<br/>

For, as some late philosophers.<br/>

Have well observ'd, beasts, that converse                     790<br/>

With man, take after him, as hogs<br/>

Get pigs all the year, and bitches dogs.<br/>

Just so, by our example, cattle<br/>

Learn to give one another battle.<br/>

We read, in NERO's time, the heathen,                         795<br/>

When they destroy'd the Christian brethren,<br/>

Did sew them in the skins of bears,<br/>

And then set dogs about their ears:<br/>

From thence, no doubt, th' invention came<br/>

Of this lewd antichristian game.                              800<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00067">To this, quoth RALPHO, Verily<br/>

The point seems very plain to me.<br/>

It is an antichristian game,<br/>

Unlawful both in thing and name.<br/>

First, for the name: the word, bear-baiting                   805<br/>

Is carnal, and of man's creating:<br/>

For certainly there's no such word<br/>

In all the scripture on record;<br/>

Therefore unlawful, and a sin;<br/>

And so is (secondly) the thing.                               810<br/>

A vile assembly 'tis, that can<br/>

No more be prov'd by scripture than<br/>

Provincial, classic, national;<br/>

Mere human-creature cobwebs all.<br/>

Thirdly, it is idolatrous;                                    815<br/>

For when men run a whoring thus<br/>

With their inventions, whatsoe'er<br/>

The thing be, whether dog or bear,<br/>

It is idolatrous and pagan,<br/>

No less than worshipping of DAGON.                            820<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00068">Quoth HUDIBRAS, I smell a rat;<br/>

RALPHO, thou dost prevaricate:<br/>

For though the thesis which thou lay'st<br/>

Be true ad amussim, as thou say'st;<br/>

(For that bear-baiting should appear                          825<br/>

Jure divino lawfuller<br/>

Than synods are, thou dost deny,<br/>

Totidem verbis; so do I;)<br/>

Yet there's a fallacy in this;<br/>

For if by sly HOMAEOSIS,                                      830<br/>

Tussis pro crepitu, an art<br/>

Under a cough to slur a f—t<br/>

Thou wou'dst sophistically imply,<br/>

Both are unlawful, I deny.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00069">And I (quoth RALPHO) do not doubt                             835<br/>

But bear-baiting may be made out,<br/>

In gospel-times, as lawful as is<br/>

Provincial or parochial classis;<br/>

And that both are so near of kin,<br/>

And like in all, as well as sin,                              840<br/>

That put them in a bag, and shake 'em,<br/>

Yourself o' th' sudden would mistake 'em,<br/>

And not know which is which, unless<br/>

You measure by their wickedness:<br/>

For 'tis not hard t'imagine whether                           845<br/>

O' th' two is worst; tho' I name neither.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00070">Quoth HUDIBRAS, Thou offer'st much,<br/>

But art not able to keep touch.<br/>

Mira de lente, as 'tis i' th' adage,<br/>

Id est, to make a leek a cabbage;                             850<br/>

Thou'lt be at best but such a bull,<br/>

Or shear-swine, all cry, and no wool;<br/>

For what can synods have at all<br/>

With bear that's analogical?<br/>

Or what relation has debating                                 855<br/>

Of church-affairs with bear-baiting?<br/>

A just comparison still is<br/>

Of things ejusdem generis;<br/>

And then what genus rightly doth<br/>

Include and comprehend them both?                             860<br/>

If animal both of us may<br/>

As justly pass for bears as they;<br/>

For we are animals no less,<br/>

Altho' of different specieses.<br/>

But, RALPHO, this is not fit place                            865<br/>

Nor time to argue out the case:<br/>

For now the field is not far off,<br/>

Where we must give the world a proof<br/>

Of deeds, not words, and such as suit<br/>

Another manner of dispute;                                    870<br/>

A controversy that affords<br/>

Actions for arguments, not words;<br/>

Which we must manage at a rate<br/>

Of prowess and conduct adequate<br/>

To what our place and fame doth promise,                      875<br/>

And all the godly expect from us,<br/>

Nor shall they be deceiv'd, unless<br/>

We're slurr'd and outed by success;<br/>

Success, the mark no mortal wit,<br/>

Or surest hand can always hit:                                880<br/>

For whatsoe'er we perpetrate,<br/>

We do but row, we're steer'd by Fate,<br/>

Which in success oft disinherits,<br/>

For spurious causes, noblest merits.<br/>

Great actions are not always true sons                        885<br/>

Of great and mighty resolutions;<br/>

Nor do th' boldest attempts bring forth<br/>

Events still equal to their worth;<br/>

But sometimes fail, and, in their stead,<br/>

Fortune and cowardice succeed.                                890<br/>

Yet we have no great cause to doubt;<br/>

Our actions still have borne us out;<br/>

Which tho' they're known to be so ample,<br/>

We need not copy from example.<br/>

We're not the only persons durst                              895<br/>

Attempt this province, nor the first.<br/>

In northern clime a val'rous Knight<br/>

Did whilom kill his bear in fght,<br/>

And wound a fiddler; we have both<br/>

Of these the objects of our wroth,                            900<br/>

And equal fame and glory from<br/>

Th' attempt of victory to come.<br/>

'Tis sung, there is a valiant &lt;u&gt; Mamaluke<br/>

In foreign land, yclep'd —<br/>

To whom we have been oft compar'd                             905<br/>

For person, parts; address, and beard;<br/>

Both equally reputed stout,<br/>

And in the same cause both have fought:<br/>

He oft in such attempts as these<br/>

Came off with glory and success;                              910<br/>

Nor will we fail in th' execution,<br/>

For want of equal resolution.<br/>

Honour is like a &lt;w&gt; widow, won<br/>

With brisk attempt and putting on;<br/>

With ent'ring manfully, and urging;                           915<br/>

Not slow approaches, like a virgin.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00071">'Tis said, as yerst the Phrygian Knight,<br/>

So ours with rusty steel did smite<br/>

His Trojan horse, and just as much<br/>

He mended pace upon the touch;                                920<br/>

But from his empty stomach groan'd<br/>

Just as that hollow beast did sound,<br/>

And angry answer'd from behind,<br/>

With brandish'd tail and blast of wind.<br/>

So have I seen, with armed heel,                              925<br/>

A wight bestride a Common-weal;<br/>

While still the more he kick'd and spurr'd,<br/>

The less the sullen jade has stirr'd.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00072" style="margin-top: 3em">Notes to Part  I, Canto I.</p>

<p id="id00073" style="margin-top: 2em">1. When civil a dudgeon, &amp;c.] Dudgeon. Who made the
alterations in the last Edition of this poem I know not, but they
are certainly sometimes for the worse; and I cannot believe the
Author would have changed a word so proper in that place as
dudgeon for that of fury, as it is in the last Edition. To take in
dudgeon, is inwardly to resent some injury or affront; a sort of
grumbling in the gizzard, and what is previous to actual fury.</p>

<p id="id00074">24 b That could as well, &amp;c.] Bind over to the Sessions as being
a Justice of the Peace in his County, as well as Colonel of a
Regiment of Foot in the Parliament's army, and a committee-Man.</p>

<p id="id00075">38 c As MONTAIGNE, &amp;c.] Montaigne, in his Essays,
supposes his cat thought him a fool, for losing his time in
playing with her.</p>

<p id="id00076">62 d To make some, &amp;c.] Here again is an alteration without
any amendment; for the following lines,</p>

<p id="id00077">And truly, so he was, perhaps,<br/>

Not as a Proselyte, but for Claps,<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00078">Are thus changed,</p>

<p id="id00079">And truly so, perhaps, he was;<br/>

'Tis many a pious Christian's case.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00080">The Heathens had an odd opinion, and have a strange reason
why Moses imposed the law of circumcision on the Jews,
which, how untrue soever, I will give the learned reader an
account of without translation, as I find it in the annotations
upon Horace, wrote by my worthy and learned friend Mr.
William Baxter, the great restorer of the ancient and promoter of
modern learning.
Hor. Sat. 9. Sermon. Lib. I.  —
Curtis; quia pellicula imminuti sunt; quia Moses Rex
Judoeorum, cujus Legibus reguntur, negligentia PHIMOZEIS
medicinaliter exsectus est, &amp; ne soles esset notabi omnes
circumcidi voluit. Vet. Schol. Vocem. — (PHIMOZEIS qua
inscitia Librarii exciderat reposuimus ex conjectura, uti &amp;
medicinaliter exsectus pro medicinalis effectus quae nihil erant.)
Quis miretur ejusmodi convicia homini Epicureo atque Pagano
excidisse? Jure igitur Henrico Glareano Diaboli Organum
videtur. Etiam Satyra Quinta haec habet: Constat omnia
miracula certa ratione fieri, de quibus Epicurei prudentissime
disputant. [Circumcised: Moses the King of the Jews,  by whose
laws they are ruled, and whose foreskin overhung (the tip of his
penis), had this blockage carelessly medicinally removed, and
not wishing to be alone wanted them all to be circumcised.
(We have tentatively restored the word BLOCKAGE, which the
scribe's incompetence has omitted, and substituted medically
removed for carried out by a doctor which was never there.)
Who shall wonder that this kind of cutting caused an outcry by
Epicureans and Pagans? It can be seen therefore, why Henricus
Glareanus judged it an implement of the devil. So the Fifth
Satire has it: It is certain that every miracle can be fitted into the
philosophical systems which the Epicureans most carefully
discuss.]</p>

<p id="id00081">66 e Profoundly skill'd, &amp;c.] Analytick is a part of logic, that
teaches to decline and construe reason, as grammar does words.</p>

<p id="id00082">93 f A Babylonish, &amp;c.] A confusion of languages, such as
some of our modern Virtuosi used to express themselves in.</p>

<p id="id00083">103 g Or CERBERUS himself, &amp;c.] Cerberus; a name which
poets give a dog with three heads, which they feigned door-
keeper of Hell, that caressed the unfortunate souls sent thither,
and devoured them that would get out again; yet Hercules tied
him up, and made him follow. This dog with three heads
denotes the past, the present, and the time to come; which
receive, and, as it were, devour all things. Hercules got the
better of him, which shews that heroic actions are always
victorious over time, because they are present in the memory of
posterity.</p>

<p id="id00084">115 h That had the, &amp;c.] Demosthenes, who is said to have had
a defect in his pronunciation, which he cured by using to speak
with little stones in his mouth.</p>

<p id="id00085">120 i Than TYCHO BRAHE, &amp;c.] Tycho Brahe was an
eminent Danish mathematician. Quer. in Collier's Dictionary, or
elsewhere.</p>

<p id="id00086">131 k Whatever Sceptick, &amp;c.] Sceptick. Pyrrho was the chief
of the Sceptick Philosophers, and was at first, as Apollodorus
saith, a painter, then became the hearer of Driso, and at last the
disciple of Anaxagoras, whom he followed into India, to see the
Gymnosophists. He pretended that men did nothing but by
custom; there was neither honesty nor dishonesty, justice nor
injustice, good nor evil. He was very solitary, lived to be ninety
years old, was highly esteemed in his country, and created chief
priest. He lived in the time of Epicurus and Theophrastus, about
the 120th Olympiad. His followers were called Phyrrhonians;
besides which they were named the Ephecticks and
Aphoreticks, but more generally Scepticks. This sect made their
chiefest good to consist in a sedateness of mind, exempt from
all passions; in regulating their opinions, and moderating their
passions, which they called Ataxia and Metriopathia; and in
suspending their judgment in regard of good and evil, truth or
falsehood, which they called Epechi. Sextus Empiricus, who
lived in the second century, under the Emperor Antoninus Pius,
writ ten books against the mathematicians or astrologers, and
three of the Phyrrhonian opinion. The word is derived from the
Greek SKEPTESZAI, quod est, considerare, speculare. [To
consider or speculate]</p>

<p id="id00087">143 l He cou'd reduce, &amp;c.] The old philosophers thought to
extract notions out of natural things, as chymists do spirits and
essences; and, when they had refined them into the nicest
subtilties, gave them as insignificant names as those operators
do their extractions: But (as Seneca says) the subtiler things are
they are but the nearer to nothing. So are all their definitions of
things by acts the nearer to nonsense.</p>

<p id="id00088">147 m Where Truth, &amp;c.] Some authors have mistaken truth for
a real thing, when it is nothing but a right method of putting
those notions or images of things (in the understanding of man)
into the same and order that their originals hold in nature, and
therefore Aristotle says Unumquodque sicut habet secundum
esse, ita se habet secundum veritatem. Met. L. ii. [As every
thing has a secondary essence, therefore it has a secondary
truth]</p>

<p id="id00089">148 n Like words congeal'd, &amp;c.] Some report in Nova Zembla,
and Greenland, mens' words are wont to be frozen in the air,
and at the thaw may heard.</p>

<p id="id00090">151 In School-Divinity as able,<br/>

    As o he that Hight, Irrefragable, &amp;c.]<br/>

Here again is another alteration of three or lines, as I think, for<br/>

the worse.<br/>

Some specific epithets were added to the title of some famous<br/>

doctors, as Angelicus, Irrefragabilis, Subtilis, [Angelic,<br/>

Unopposable, Discriminating] &amp;c. Vide Vossi Etymolog.<br/>

Baillet Jugemens de Scavans, &amp; Possevin's Apparatus<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00091">153 p A Second THOMAS or at once,
    To name them all, another DUNCE.
Thomas Aquinas, a Dominican friar, was born in 1224, and
studied at Cologne and Paris. He new modelled the school-
divinity, and was therefore called the Angelic Doctor, and Eagle
of Divines. The most illustrious persons of his time were
ambitious of his friendship, and put a high value on his merits,
so that they offered him bishopricks, which he refused with as
much ardor as others seek after them. He died in the fiftieth year
of his age, and was canonized by Pope John XII. We have his
works in eighteen volumes, several times printed.</p>

<p id="id00092">Johannes Dunscotus was a very learned man, who lived about
the end of the thirteenth and beginning of the fourteenth
century. The English and Scotch strive which of them shall have
the honour of his birth. The English say, he was born in
Northumberland: the Scots alledge he was born at Duns, in the
Mers, the neighbouring county to Northumberland, and hence
was called Dunscotus. Moreri, Buchanan, and other Scotch
historians, are of this opinion, and for proof cite his epitaph:</p>

<p id="id00093">Scotia me genuit, Anglia suscepit,<br/>

Gallia edocuit, Germania tenet.<br/>

[Scotland bore me, England reared me,<br/>

France instructed me, Germany kept me.]<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00094">He died at Cologne, Novem. 8. 1308. In the Supplement to Dr.
Cave's Historia Literaria, he is said to be extraordinary learned
in physicks, metaphysicks, mathematicks, and astronomy; that
his fame was so great when at Oxford, that 30,000 scholars
came thither to hear his lectures: that when at Paris, his
arguments and authority carried it for the immaculate
conception of the Blessed Virgin; so that they appointed a
festival on that account, and would admit us scholars to degrees
but such as were of this mind. He was a great opposer of
Thomas Aquinas's doctrine; and, for being a very acute
logician, was called Doctor Subtilis; [Discriminating (or,
literally, Slender) Teacher] which was the reason also, that an
old punster always called him the Lathy Doctor.</p>

<p id="id00095">158 q As tough as, &amp;c.] Sorbon was the first and most
considerable college of the university of Paris, founded in time
reign of St. Lewis, by Robert Sorbon, which name is sometimes
given to the whole University of Paris, which was founded,
about the year 741, by Charlemagne, at the persuasion of the
learned Alcuinus, who was one of the first professors there;
since which time it has been very famous. This college has been
rebuilt with an extraordinary magnificence, at the charge of
Cardinal Richlieu, and contains lodgings for thirty-six doctors,
who are called the Society of Sorbon. Those which are received
among them before they have received their doctor's degree are
only said to be of the Hospitality of Sorbon. Claud. Hemeraus
de Acad. Paris. Spondan in Annal.</p>

<p id="id00096">173 r he knew, &amp;c.] There is nothing more ridiculous than the
various opinions of authors about the seat of Paradise. Sir.
Walter Raleigh has taken a great deal of pains to collect them,
in the beginning of his History of the World; where those, who
are unsatisfied, may be fully informed.</p>

<p id="id00097">180 s By a High-Dutch, &amp;c.] Goropius Becanus endeavours to
prove that High-Dutch was the language that Adam and Eve
spoke in Paradise.</p>

<p id="id00098">181 t If either of &amp;c.] Adam and Eve being made, and not
conceived and formed in the womb had no navels as some
learned men have supposed, because they had no need of them.</p>

<p id="id00099">182 u Who first made, &amp;c.] Musick is said to be invented by
Pythagoras, who first found out the proportion of notes from
the sounds of hammers upon an anvil</p>

<p id="id00100">232 w Like MAHOMET's &amp;c.) Mahomet had a tame dove, that
used to pick seeds out of his ear that it might be thought to
whisper and inspire him. His ass was so intimate with him, that
the Mahometans believed it carried him to heaven, and stays
there with him to bring him back again.</p>

<p id="id00101">257 x It was Monastick, and did grow
      In holy Orders by strict Vow.
He made a vow never to cut his beard until the Parliament had
subdued the King; of which order of phanatick votaries there
were many in those times.</p>

<p id="id00102">281 y So learned TALIACOTIUS &amp;c.] Taliacotius was an
Italian surgeon, that found out a way to repair lost and decayed
noses. This Taliacotius was chief surgeon to the Great Duke of
Tuscany, and wrote a treatise, De Curtis Membris, [Of Cut-off
Parts] which he dedicates to his great master wherein he not
only declares the models of his wonderful operations in
restoring of lost members, but gives you cuts of the very
instruments and ligatures he made use of therein; from hence
our Author (cum poetica licentia [with poetic licence]) has
taken his simile.</p>

<p id="id00103">289 z For as AENEAS, &amp;c.] AEneas was the son of Anchises
and Venus; a Trojan, who, after long travels, came to Italy, and
after the death of his father-in-law, Latinus, was made king of
Latium, and reigned three years. His story is too long to insert
here, and therefore I refer you to Virgil's AEneids. Troy being
laid in ashes, he took his aged father Anchises upon his back,
and rescued him from his enemies. But being too solicitous for
his son and household gods, he lost his wife Creusa; which Mr.
Dryden, in his excellent translation, thus expresseth.</p>

<p id="id00104">Haste my dear father (tis no time to wait,)<br/>

And load my shoulders with a willing freight.<br/>

Whate'er befals, your life shall be my care;<br/>

One death, or one deliv'rance, we will share.<br/>

My hand shall lead our little son; and you,<br/>

My faithful consort, shall our steps pursue.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00105">337 a — For ARTHUR, &amp;c.] Who this Arthur was and whether
any ever reigned in Britain, has been doubted heretofore, and is
by some to this very day. However, the history of him, which
makes him one of the nine worthies of the world, is a subject,
sufficient for the Poet to be pleasant upon.</p>

<p id="id00106">359 b — Toledo trusty, &amp;c.] The capital city of New Castile,
Spain, with an archbishopric and primacy. It was very famous,
amongst other things, for tempering the best metal for swords,
as Damascus was and perhaps may be still.</p>

<p id="id00107">389 c But left the trade, as many more
      Have lately done, &amp;c.
Oliver Cromwell and Colonel Pride had been both brewers.</p>

<p id="id00108">433 d That CAESAR's Horse, who, as Fame goes,
      Had corns upon his Feet and Toes.
Julius Caesar had a horse with feet like a man's. Utebatur equo
insigni; pedibus prope humanis, modum digitorum ungulis
fissis. [He rode a horse with this distinction; it had feet like a
man's, having the hooves split like toes] Suet. in Jul. Cap. 61.</p>

<p id="id00109">467 c The mighty Tyrian Queen, that gain'd
      With subtle Shreds a Tract of Land.
Dido, Queen of Carthage, who bought as much land as she
could compass with an ox's hide, which she cut into small
thongs, and cheated the owner of so much ground as served her
to build Carthage upon.</p>

<p id="id00110">476 f As the bold, &amp;c.] AEneas, whom Virgil reports to use a
golden bough for a pass to hell; and taylors call that place Hell
where they put all they steal.</p>

<p id="id00111">526 g As three, &amp;c.] Read the great Geographical Dictionary,
under that word.</p>

<p id="id00112">520 h In Magick, &amp;c.] Talisman is a device to destroy any sort
of vermin, by casting their images in metal, in a precise minute,
when the stars are perfectly inclined to do them all the mischief
they can. This has been experienced by some modern Virtuosi
upon rats, mice, and fleas, and found (as they affirm) to produce
the effect with admirable success.</p>

<p id="id00113">Raymund Lully interprets cabal, out of the Arabic, to signify<br/>

Scientia superabundans; which his commentator, Cornelius<br/>

Agrippa, by over-magnifying, has rendered a very superfluous<br/>

foppery.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00114">532 i As far as, &amp;c.] The author of Magia Adamica endeavours
to prove the learning of the ancient Magi to be derived from that
knowledge which God himself taught Adam in Paradise before
the fall.</p>

<p id="id00115">535 And much of Terra Incognita,
    The intelligible World cou'd say.
The intelligible world is a kind of Terra Del Fuego, or
Psittacorum Regio[Land of Parrots], &amp;c. discovered only by the
philosophers; of which they talk, like parrots, what they do not
understand.</p>

<p id="id00116">538 k learned &amp;c.] No nation in the world is more addicted to
this occult philosophy than the Wild-Irish are, as appears by the
whole practice of their lives; of which see Camden in his
description of Ireland.</p>

<p id="id00117">539 l Or Sir AGRIPPA, &amp;c.] They who would know more of
Sir Cornelius Agrippa, here meant, may consult the Great
Dictionary.</p>

<p id="id00118">541 m He ANTHROPOSOPHUS and FLOUD,
      And JACOB BEHMEN understood.
Anthroposophus is only a compound Greek word, which
signifies a man that is wise in the knowledge of men, as is used
by some anonymous author to conceal his true name.
Dr. Floud was a sort of an English Rosy-crucian, whose works
are extant, and as intelligible as those of Jacob Behmen.</p>

<p id="id00119">545 n In ROSY-CRUCIAN Lore as learned
      As he that Vere Adeptus earned.
The fraternity of the Rosy-crucians is very like the sect of the
ancient Gnostici, who called them selves so from the excellent
learning they pretended to, although they were really the most
ridiculous sots of mankind.
Vere Adeptus is one that has commenced in their phanatick
extravagance.</p>

<p id="id00120">646 o Thou that with Ale or viler Liquors,
      Didst inspire WITHERS, PRYN, and VICARS.
This Vicars was a man of as great interest and authority in the
late Reformation as Pryn or Withers, and as able a poet. He
translated Virgil's AEneids into as horrible Travesty, in earnest,
as the French Scaroon did in burlesque, and was only outdone
in his way by the politic author of Oceana.</p>

<p id="id00121">714 p We that are, &amp;c.] This speech is set down as it was
delivered by the Knight, in his own words: But since it is below
the gravity of heroical poetry to admit of humour, but all men
are obliged to speak wisely alike, and too much of so
extravagant a folly would become tedious and impertinent, the
rest of his harangues have only his sense expressed in other
words, unless in some few places, where his own words could
not be so well avoided.</p>

<p id="id00122">753 q In bloody, &amp;c.] Cynarctomachy signifies no thing in the
world but a fight between dogs and bears; though both the
learned and ignorant agree that in such words very great
knowledge is contained: And our Knight, as one, or both, of
these, was of the same opinion.</p>

<p id="id00123">758 r Or Force, &amp;c.] Averruncate: Another of the same kind,
which, though it appear ever so learned and profound, means
nothing else but the weeding of corn.</p>

<p id="id00124">777 s The Indians fought for the Truth
      Of th' Elephant and Monkey's Tooth.
The History of the White Elephant and the Monkey's-Tooth,
which the Indians adored, is written by Mons. le Blanc. This
monkey's tooth was taken by the Portuguese from those that
worshipped it; and though they offered a vast ransom for it, yet
the Christians were persuaded by their priests rather to burn it.
But as soon as the fire was kindled, all the people present were
not able to endure the horrible stink that came from it, as if the
fire had been made of the same ingredients with which seamen
use to compose that kind of granados which they call stinkards.</p>

<p id="id00125">786 t The Rage, &amp;c.] Boute-feus is a French word, and therefore
it were uncivil to suppose any English person (especially of
quality) ignorant of it, or so ill-bred as to need an exposition.</p>

<p id="id00126">903 u 'Tis sung, &amp;c.] Mamaluke is the name of the militia of the
Sultans of Egypt. It signified a servant or soldier. They were
commonly captives taken from amongst the Christians, and
instructed in military discipline, and did not marry. Their power
was great; for besides that the Sultans were chosen out of their
body, they disposed of the most important offices of the
kingdom. They were formidable about 200 years; 'till at last
Selim, Sultan of the Turks, routed them, and killed their Sultan,
near Aleppo, 1516, and so put an end to the empire of
Mamalukes, which had lasted 267 years.
No question but the rhime to Mamaluke was meant Sir Samuel
Luke, of whom in the Preface.</p>

<p id="id00127">913 w Honour is like, &amp;c.] Our English proverbs are not
impertinent to this purpose:</p>

<p id="id00128">He that woos a Maid, must seldom come in her sight:<br/>

But he that woos a Widow, must woo her Day and Night.<br/>

He that woos a Maid, must feign, lye, and flatter:<br/>

But he that woos a Widow, must down with his Breeches, and at her.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00129">This proverb being somewhat immodest, Mr Ray says he would
not have inserted it in his collection, but that he met with it in a
little book, intitled, the Quakers' Spiritual Court Proclaimed;
written by Nathaniel Smith, Student in Physic; wherein the
author mentions it as counsel given him by Hilkiah Bedford, an
eminent Quaker in London, who would have had him to have
married a rich widow, in whose house he lodged. In case he
could get her, this Nathaniel Smith had promised Hilkiah a
chamber gratis. The whole narrative is worth the reading.</p>

<h3 id="id00130" style="margin-top: 3em">PART I.</h3>

<h4 id="id00131" style="margin-top: 2em">CANTO II.</h4>

<h4 id="id00132" style="margin-top: 2em">THE ARGUMENT.</h4>

<p id="id00133">————————————————————————-<br/>

The catalogue and character<br/>

Of th' enemies best men of war;<br/>

Whom, in bold harangue, the Knight<br/>

Defies, and challenges to fight.<br/>

H' encounters Talgol, routs the Bear,<br/>

And takes the Fiddler prisoner,<br/>

Conveys him to enchanted castle;<br/>

There shuts him fast in wooden bastile.<br/>

————————————————————————-<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00134" style="margin-top: 2em">THERE was an ancient sage philosopher,<br/>

That had read ALEXANDER Ross over,<br/>

And swore the world, as he cou'd prove,<br/>

Was made of fighting and of love:<br/>

Just so romances are; for what else                             5<br/>

Is in them all, but love and battels?<br/>

O' th' first of these we've no great matter<br/>

To treat of, but a world o' th' latter;<br/>

In which to do the injur'd right<br/>

We mean, in what concerns just fight.                          10<br/>

Certes our authors are to blame,<br/>

For to make some well-sounding name<br/>

A pattern fit for modern Knights<br/>

To copy out in frays and fights;<br/>

Like those that a whole street do raze                         15<br/>

To build a palace in the place.<br/>

They never care how many others<br/>

They kill, without regard of mothers,<br/>

Or wives, or children, so they can<br/>

Make up some fierce, dead-doing man,                           20<br/>

Compos'd of many ingredient valors,<br/>

Just like the manhood of nine taylors.<br/>

So a Wild Tartar, when he spies<br/>

A man that's handsome, valiant, wise,<br/>

If he can kill him, thinks t' inherit                          25<br/>

His wit, his beauty, and his spirit<br/>

As if just so much he enjoy'd<br/>

As in another is destroy'd<br/>

For when a giant's slain in fight,<br/>

And mow'd o'erthwart, or cleft down right,                     30<br/>

It is a heavy case, no doubt;<br/>

A man should have his brains beat out<br/>

Because he's tall, and has large bones;<br/>

As men kill beavers for their stones.<br/>

But as for our part, we shall tell                             35<br/>

The naked truth of what befel;<br/>

And as an equal friend to both<br/>

The Knight and Bear, but more to troth,<br/>

With neither faction shall take part,<br/>

But give to each his due desert;                               40<br/>

And never coin a formal lie on't,<br/>

To make the Knight o'ercome the giant.<br/>

This b'ing profest, we've hopes enough,<br/>

And now go on where we left off.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00135">They rode; but authors having not                              45<br/>

Determin'd whether pace or trot,<br/>

(That is to say, whether &lt;x&gt; tollutation,<br/>

As they do term't, or succussation,)<br/>

We leave it, and go on, as now<br/>

Suppose they did, no matter how;                               50<br/>

Yet some from subtle hints have got<br/>

Mysterious light, it was a trot:<br/>

But let that pass: they now begun<br/>

To spur their living-engines on.<br/>

For as whipp'd tops, and bandy'd balls,                        55<br/>

The learned hold, are animals;<br/>

So horses they affirm to be<br/>

Mere engines made by geometry;<br/>

And were invented first from engines,<br/>

As &lt;y&gt; Indian Britons were from Penguins.                      60<br/>

So let them be; and, as I was saying,<br/>

They their live engines ply'd, not staying<br/>

Until they reach'd the fatal champain,<br/>

Which th' enemy did then encamp on;<br/>

The &lt;z&gt; dire Pharsalian plain, where battle                    65<br/>

Was to be wag'd 'twixt puissant cattle<br/>

And fierce auxiliary men,<br/>

That came to aid their brethren,<br/>

Who now began to take the field,<br/>

As Knight from ridge of steed beheld.                          70<br/>

For as our modern wits behold,<br/>

Mounted a pick-back on the old,<br/>

Much further oft; much further he,<br/>

Rais'd on his aged beast cou'd see;<br/>

Yet not sufficient to descry                                   75<br/>

All postures of the enemy;<br/>

Wherefore he bids the Squire ride further,<br/>

T' observe their numbers, and their order;<br/>

That when their motions he had known<br/>

He might know how to fit his own.                              80<br/>

Meanwhile he stopp'd his willing steed,<br/>

To fit himself for martial deed.<br/>

Both kinds of metal he prepar'd,<br/>

Either to give blows, or to ward:<br/>

Courage and steel, both of great force,                        85<br/>

Prepar'd for better, or for worse.<br/>

His death-charg'd pistols he did fit well,<br/>

Drawn out from life-preserving vittle.<br/>

These being prim'd, with force he labour'd<br/>

To free's sword from retentive scabbard                        90<br/>

And, after many a painful pluck,<br/>

From rusty durance he bail'd tuck.<br/>

Then shook himself, to see that prowess<br/>

In scabbard of his arms sat loose;<br/>

And, rais'd upon his desp'rate foot,                           95<br/>

On stirrup-side he gaz'd about,<br/>

Portending blood, like blazing star,<br/>

The beacon of approaching war.<br/>

RALPHO rode on with no less speed<br/>

Than Hugo in the forest did;                                  100<br/>

But far more in returning made;<br/>

For now the foe he had survey'd,<br/>

Rang'd as to him they did appear,<br/>

With van, main battle, wings, and rear.<br/>

I' the head of all this warlike rabble,                       105<br/>

CROWDERO march'd, expert and able.<br/>

Instead of trumpet and of drum,<br/>

That makes the warrior's stomach come,<br/>

Whose noise whets valour sharp, like beer<br/>

By thunder turn'd to vinegar,                                 110<br/>

(For if a trumpet sound, or drum beat,<br/>

Who has not a month's mind to combat?)<br/>

A squeaking engine he apply'd<br/>

Unto his neck, on north-east side,<br/>

Just where the hangman does dispose,                          115<br/>

To special friends, the knot of noose:<br/>

For 'tis great grace, when statesmen straight<br/>

Dispatch a friend, let others wait.<br/>

His warped ear hung o'er the strings,<br/>

Which was but souse to chitterlings:                          120<br/>

For guts, some write, e'er they are sodden,<br/>

Are fit for music, or for pudden;<br/>

From whence men borrow ev'ry kind<br/>

Of minstrelsy by string or wind.<br/>

His grisly beard was long and thick,                          125<br/>

With which he strung his fiddle-stick;<br/>

For he to horse-tail scorn'd to owe,<br/>

For what on his own chin did grow.<br/>

Chiron, &lt;a&gt; the four-legg'd bard, had both<br/>

A beard and tail of his own growth;                           130<br/>

And yet by authors 'tis averr'd,<br/>

He made use only of his beard.<br/>

In &lt;b&gt; Staffordshire, where virtuous worth<br/>

Does raise the minstrelsy, not birth;<br/>

Where bulls do chuse the boldest king,                        135<br/>

And ruler, o'er the men of string;<br/>

(As once in Persia, 'tis said,<br/>

Kings were proclaim'd by a horse that neigh'd;)<br/>

He bravely venturing at a crown,<br/>

By chance of war was beaten down,                             140<br/>

And wounded sore. His leg then broke,<br/>

Had got a deputy of oak:<br/>

For when a shin in fight is cropp'd,<br/>

The knee with one of timber's propp'd,<br/>

Esteem'd more honourable than the other,                      145<br/>

And takes place, though the younger brother.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00136">Next march'd brave ORSIN, famous for<br/>

Wise conduct, and success in war:<br/>

A skilful leader, stout, severe,<br/>

Now marshal to the champion bear.                             150<br/>

With truncheon, tipp'd with iron head,<br/>

The warrior to the lists he led;<br/>

With solemn march and stately pace,<br/>

But far more grave and solemn face;<br/>

Grave &lt;c&gt; as the Emperor of Pegu                              155<br/>

Or Spanish potentate Don Diego.<br/>

This leader was of knowledge great,<br/>

Either for charge or for retreat.<br/>

He knew when to fall on pell-mell;<br/>

To fall back and retreat as well.                             160<br/>

So lawyers, lest the bear defendant,<br/>

And plaintiff dog, should make an end on't,<br/>

Do stave and tail with writs of error,<br/>

Reverse of judgment, and demurrer,<br/>

To let them breathe a while, and then                         165<br/>

Cry whoop, and set them on agen.<br/>

As ROMULUS a wolf did rear,<br/>

So he was dry-nurs'd by a bear,<br/>

That fed him with the purchas'd prey<br/>

Of many a fierce and bloody fray;                             170<br/>

Bred up, where discipline most rare is,<br/>

In military Garden Paris. &lt;&gt;<br/>

For soldiers heretofore did grow<br/>

In gardens, just as weeds do now,<br/>

Until some splay-foot politicians                             175<br/>

T'APOLLO offer'd up petitions<br/>

For licensing a new invention<br/>

They'd found out of an antique engine,<br/>

To root out all the weeds that grow<br/>

In public gardens at a blow,                                  180<br/>

And leave th' herbs standing. Quoth Sir Sun,<br/>

My friends, that is not to be done.<br/>

Not done! quoth Statesmen; yes, an't please ye,<br/>

When it's once known, you'll say 'tis easy.<br/>

Why then let's know it, quoth Apollo.                         185<br/>

We'll beat a drum, and they'll all follow.<br/>

A drum! (quoth PHOEBUS;) troth, that's true;<br/>

A pretty invention, quaint and new.<br/>

But though of voice and instrument<br/>

We are the undoubted president,                               190<br/>

We such loud music don't profess:<br/>

The Devil's master of that office,<br/>

Where it must pass, if't be a drum;<br/>

He'll sign it with Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.<br/>

To him apply yourselves, and he                               195<br/>

Will soon dispatch you for his fee.<br/>

They did so; but it prov'd so ill,<br/>

Th' had better let 'em grow there still.<br/>

But to resume what we discoursing<br/>

Were on before, that is, stout ORSIN:                         200<br/>

That which so oft, by sundry writers,<br/>

Has been applied t' almost all fighters,<br/>

More justly may b' ascrib'd to this<br/>

Than any other warrior, (viz.)<br/>

None ever acted both parts bolder,                            205<br/>

Both of a chieftain and a soldier.<br/>

He was of great descent and high<br/>

For splendour and antiquity;<br/>

And from celestial origine<br/>

Deriv'd himself in a right line.                              210<br/>

Not as the ancient heroes did,<br/>

Who, that their base-births might be hid,<br/>

(Knowing they were of doubtful gender,<br/>

And that they came in at a windore)<br/>

Made Jupiter himself and others                               215<br/>

O' th' gods, gallants to their own mothers,<br/>

To get on them a race of champions,<br/>

(Of which old Homer first made Lampoons.)<br/>

ARCTOPHYLAX, in northern spheres<br/>

Was his undoubted ancestor:                                   220<br/>

From him his great forefathers came,<br/>

And in all ages bore his name.<br/>

Learned he was in med'c'nal lore;<br/>

For by his side a pouch he wore,<br/>

Replete with strange Hermetic powder,                         225<br/>

That wounds nine miles point-blank wou'd solder;<br/>

By skilful chemist, with great cost,<br/>

Extracted from a rotten post;<br/>

But of a heav'nlier influence<br/>

Than that which mountebanks dispense;                         230<br/>

Tho' by Promethean fire made, &lt;&gt;<br/>

As they do quack that drive that trade.<br/>

For as when slovens do amiss<br/>

At others doors, by stool or piss,<br/>

The learned write, a red-hot spit                             235<br/>

B'ing prudently apply'd to it,<br/>

Will convey mischief from the dung<br/>

Unto the part that did the wrong,<br/>

So this did healing; and as sure<br/>

As that did mischief this would cure.                         240<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00137">Thus virtuous ORSIN was endu'd<br/>

With learning, conduct, fortitude,<br/>

Incomparable: and as the prince<br/>

Of poets, HOMER sung long since<br/>

A skilful leech is better far                                 245<br/>

Than half an hundred men of war,<br/>

So he appear'd; and by his skill,<br/>

No less than dint of sword, cou'd kill<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00138">The gallant BRUIN march'd next him,<br/>

With visage formidably grim,                                  250<br/>

And rugged as a Saracen,<br/>

Or Turk of Mahomet's own kin;<br/>

Clad in a mantle della guerre<br/>

Of rough impenetrable fur;<br/>

And in his nose, like Indian King,                            255<br/>

He wore, for ornament, a ring;<br/>

About his neck a threefold gorget.<br/>

As rough as trebled leathern target;<br/>

Armed, as heralds cant, and langued;<br/>

Or, as the vulgar say, sharp-fanged.                          260<br/>

For as the teeth in beasts of prey<br/>

Are swords, with which they fight in fray;<br/>

So swords, in men of war, are teeth,<br/>

Which they do eat their vittle with.<br/>

He was by birth, some authors write,                          265<br/>

A Russian; some, a Muscovite;<br/>

And 'mong the Cossacks had been bred; &lt;&gt;<br/>

Of whom we in diurnals read,<br/>

That serve to fill up pages here,<br/>

As with their bodies ditches there.                           270<br/>

SCRIMANSKY was his cousin-german,<br/>

With whom he serv'd, and fed on vermin;<br/>

And when these fail'd, he'd suck his claws,<br/>

And quarter himself upon his paws.<br/>

And tho' his countrymen, the Huns,&lt;&gt;                          275<br/>

Did stew their meat between their bums<br/>

And th' horses backs o'er which they straddle,<br/>

And ev'ry man eat up his saddle;<br/>

He was not half so nice as they,<br/>

But eat it raw when 't came in's way.                         280<br/>

He had trac'd countries far and near,<br/>

More than LE BLANC, the traveller;<br/>

Who writes, he spous'd in India,<br/>

Of noble house, a lady gay,<br/>

And got on her a race of worthies,                            285<br/>

As stout as any upon earth is.<br/>

Full many a fight for him between<br/>

TALGOL and ORSIN oft had been<br/>

Each striving to deserve the crown<br/>

Of a sav'd citizen; the one                                   290<br/>

To guard his bear; the other fought<br/>

To aid his dog; both made more stout<br/>

By sev'ral spurs of neighbourhood,<br/>

Church-fellow-membership, and blood<br/>

But TALGOL, mortal foe to cows,                               295<br/>

Never got aught of him but blows;<br/>

Blows, hard and heavy, such as he<br/>

Had lent, repaid with usury.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00139">Yet TALGOL was of courage stout,<br/>

And vanquish'd oft'ner than he fought:                        300<br/>

Inur'd to labour, sweat and toil,<br/>

And like a champion shone with oil.<br/>

Right many a widow his keen blade,.<br/>

And many fatherless had made.<br/>

He many a boar and huge dun-cow                               305<br/>

Did, like another Guy, o'erthrow;<br/>

But Guy with him in fight compar'd,<br/>

Had like the boar or dun-cow far'd<br/>

With greater troops of sheep h' had fought<br/>

Than AJAX or bold DON QUIXOTE:                                310<br/>

And many a serpent of fell kind,<br/>

With wings before and stings behind,<br/>

Subdu'd: as poets say, long agone<br/>

Bold Sir GEORGE, St. GEORGE did the dragon.<br/>

Nor engine, nor device polemic,                              31 5<br/>

Disease, nor doctor epidemic,<br/>

Tho' stor'd with deletory med'cines,<br/>

(Which whosoever took is dead since,)<br/>

E'er sent so vast a colony<br/>

To both the underworlds as he:                                320<br/>

For he was of that noble trade<br/>

That demi-gods and heroes made,<br/>

Slaughter and knocking on the head;.<br/>

The trade to which they all were bred;<br/>

And is, like others, glorious when                            325<br/>

'Tis great and large, but base if mean.<br/>

The former rides in triumph for it;<br/>

The latter in a two-wheel'd chariot<br/>

For daring to profane a thing<br/>

So sacred with vile bungling.                                 330<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00140">Next these the brave MAGNANO came;<br/>

MAGNANO, great in martial fame.<br/>

Yet when with ORSIN he wag'd fight,<br/>

'Tis sung, he got but little by't.<br/>

Yet he was fierce as forest boar,                             335<br/>

Whose spoils upon his back he wore,<br/>

As thick as AJAX' seven-fold shield,<br/>

Which o'er his brazen arms he held:<br/>

But brass was feeble to resist<br/>

The fury of his armed fist:                                   340<br/>

Nor cou'd the hardest ir'n hold out<br/>

Against his blows, but they wou'd through't.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00141">In MAGIC he was deeply read<br/>

As he that made the brazen head;<br/>

Profoundly skill'd in the black art;                          345<br/>

As ENGLISH MERLIN for his heart;<br/>

But far more skilful in the spheres<br/>

Than he was at the sieve and shears.<br/>

He cou'd transform himself in colour<br/>

As like the devil as a collier;                               350<br/>

As like as hypocrites in show<br/>

Are to true saints, or crow to crow.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00142">Of WARLIKE ENGINES he was author,<br/>

Devis'd for quick dispatch of slaughter:<br/>

The cannon, blunderbuss, and saker,                           355<br/>

He was th' inventor of, and maker:<br/>

The trumpet, and the kettle-drum,<br/>

Did both from his invention come.<br/>

He was the first that e'er did teach<br/>

To make, and how to stop, a breach.                           360<br/>

A lance he bore with iron pike;<br/>

Th' one half wou'd thrust, the other strike;<br/>

And when their forces he had join'd,<br/>

He scorn'd to turn his parts behind.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00143">He TRULLA lov'd; TRULLA, more bright                          365<br/>

Than burnish'd armour of her Knight:<br/>

A bold virago, stout and tall,<br/>

As &lt;d&gt; JOAN of FRANCE, or English MALL.<br/>

Thro' perils both of wind and limb,<br/>

Thro' thick and thin, she follow'd him,                       370<br/>

In ev'ry adventure h' undertook,<br/>

And never him or it forsook.<br/>

At breach of wall, or hedge surprize,<br/>

She shar'd i' th' hazard and the prize:<br/>

At beating quarters up, or forage,                            375<br/>

Behav'd herself with matchless courage;<br/>

And laid about in fight more busily<br/>

Than the &lt;e&gt; Amazonian dame Penthesile.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00144">And though some criticks here cry shame,<br/>

And say our authors are to blame,                             380<br/>

That (spite of all philosophers,<br/>

Who hold no females stout, but bears;<br/>

And heretofore did so abhor<br/>

That women should pretend to war,<br/>

'They wou'd not suffer the stoutest dame                      385<br/>

To swear &lt;f&gt; by HERCULES'S name)<br/>

Make feeble ladies, in their works,<br/>

To fight like termagants and Turks;<br/>

To lay their native arms aside,<br/>

 Their modesty, and ride astride;                             390<br/>

 To run a-tilt at men, and wield<br/>

 Their naked tools in open field;<br/>

 As stout &lt;g&gt; ARMIDA, bold TRALESTRIS,<br/>

 And she that wou'd have been the mistress<br/>

 Of &lt;h&gt; GUNDIBERT; but he had grace,                          395<br/>

And rather took a country lass;<br/>

They say, 'tis false, without all sense,<br/>

But of pernicious consequence<br/>

To government, which they suppose<br/>

Can never be upheld in prose;                                 400<br/>

Strip nature naked to the skin,<br/>

You'll find about her no such thing.<br/>

It may be so; yet what we tell<br/>

Of TRULLA that's improbable,<br/>

Shall be depos'd by those who've seen't,                      405<br/>

Or, what's as good, produc'd in print:<br/>

And if they will not take our word,<br/>

We'll prove it true upon record.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00145">The upright CERDON next advanc't,<br/>

Of all his race the valiant'st:                               410<br/>

CERDON the Great, renown'd in song,<br/>

Like HERC'LES, for repair of wrong:<br/>

He rais'd the low, and fortify'd<br/>

The weak against the strongest side:<br/>

Ill has he read, that never hit                               415<br/>

On him in Muses' deathless writ.<br/>

He had a weapon keen and fierce,<br/>

That through a bull-hide shield wou'd pierce,<br/>

And cut it in a thousand pieces,                              420<br/>

Tho' tougher than the Knight of Greece his,<br/>

With whom his black-thumb'd ancestor<br/>

Was comrade in the ten years war:<br/>

For when the restless Greeks sat down<br/>

So many years before Troy town,                               425<br/>

And were renown'd, as HOMER writes,<br/>

For well-soal'd boots no less than fights,<br/>

They ow'd that glory only to<br/>

His ancestor, that made them so.<br/>

Fast friend he was to REFORMATION,                            430<br/>

Until 'twas worn quite out of fashion.<br/>

Next rectifier of wry LAW,<br/>

And wou'd make three to cure one flaw.<br/>

Learned he was, and could take note,<br/>

Transcribe, collect, translate, and quote.                    435<br/>

But PREACHING was his chiefest talent,<br/>

Or argument, in which b'ing valiant,<br/>

He us'd to lay about and stickle,<br/>

Like ram or bull, at conventicle:<br/>

For disputants, like rams and bulls,                          440<br/>

Do fight with arms that spring from skulls.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00146">Last COLON came, bold man of war,<br/>

Destin'd to blows by fatal star;<br/>

Right expert in command of horse;<br/>

But cruel, and without remorse.                               445<br/>

That which of CENTAUR long ago<br/>

Was said, and has been wrested to<br/>

Some other knights, was true of this;<br/>

He and his horse were of a piece.<br/>

One spirit did inform them both;                              450<br/>

The self-same vigour, fury, wroth:<br/>

Yet he was much the rougher part,<br/>

And always had a harder heart;<br/>

Although his horse had been of those<br/>

That fed on man's flesh, as fame goes.                        455<br/>

Strange food for horse! and yet, alas!<br/>

It may be true, for flesh is grass.<br/>

Sturdy he was, and no less able<br/>

Than HERCULES to clean a stable;<br/>

As great a drover, and as great                               460<br/>

A critic too, in hog or neat.<br/>

He ripp'd the womb up of his mother,<br/>

Dame Tellus, 'cause she wanted fother<br/>

And provender wherewith to feed<br/>

Himself, and his less cruel steed.                            465<br/>

It was a question, whether he<br/>

Or's horse were of a family<br/>

More worshipful: 'till antiquaries<br/>

(After th' had almost por'd out their eyes)<br/>

Did very learnedly decide                                     470<br/>

The business on the horse's side;<br/>

And prov'd not only horse, but cows,<br/>

Nay, pigs, were of the elder house:<br/>

For beasts, when man was but a piece<br/>

Of earth himself, did th' earth possess.                      475<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00147">These worthies were the chief that led<br/>

The combatants, each in the head<br/>

Of his command, with arms and rage,<br/>

Ready and longing to engage.<br/>

The numerous rabble was drawn out                             480<br/>

Of sev'ral counties round about,<br/>

From villages remote, and shires,<br/>

Of east and western hemispheres<br/>

From foreign parishes and regions,<br/>

Of different manners, speech, religions,                      485<br/>

Came men and mastiffs; some to fight<br/>

For fame and honour, some for sight.<br/>

And now the field of death, the lists,<br/>

Were enter'd by antagonists,<br/>

And blood was ready to be broach'd,                           490<br/>

When HUDIBRAS in haste approach'd,<br/>

With Squire and weapons, to attack 'em:<br/>

But first thus from his horse bespake 'em:<br/>

What rage, O citizens! what fury<br/>

Doth you to these dire actions hurry?                         495<br/>

What &lt;i&gt; oestrum, what phrenetic mood,<br/>

Makes you thus lavish of your blood,<br/>

While the proud Vies your trophies boast<br/>

And unreveng'd walks — ghost?<br/>

What towns, what garrisons might you                          500<br/>

With hazard of this blood subdue,<br/>

Which now y'are bent to throw away<br/>

In vain, untriumphable fray!<br/>

Shall SAINTS in civil bloodshed wallow<br/>

Of Saints, and let the CAUSE lie fallow?                      505<br/>

The Cause for which we fought and swore<br/>

So boldly, shall we now give o'er?<br/>

Then, because quarrels still are seen<br/>

With oaths and swearings to begin,<br/>

The SOLEMN LEAGUE and COVENANT                                510<br/>

Will seem a mere God-dam-me rant;<br/>

And we, that took it, and have fought,<br/>

As lewd as drunkards that fall out.<br/>

For as we make war for the King<br/>

Against himself the self-same thing,                          515<br/>

Some will not stick to swear we do<br/>

For God and for Religion too:<br/>

For if bear-baiting we allow,<br/>

What good can Reformation do?<br/>

The blood and treasure that's laid out,                       520<br/>

Is thrown away, and goes for nought.<br/>

Are these the fruits o' th' PROTESTATION,<br/>

The Prototype of Reformation,<br/>

Which all the Saints, and some, since Martyrs,<br/>

Wore &lt;k&gt; in their hats like wedding garters,                  525<br/>

When 'twas &lt;l&gt; resolv'd by either house<br/>

Six Members quarrel to espouse?<br/>

Did they for this draw down the rabble,<br/>

With zeal and noises formidable,<br/>

And make all cries about the town                             530<br/>

Join throats to cry the Bishops down?<br/>

Who having round begirt the palace,<br/>

(As once a month they do the gallows,)<br/>

As members gave the sign about,<br/>

Set up their throats with hideous shout.                      535<br/>

When tinkers bawl'd aloud to settle<br/>

Church discipline, for patching kettle:<br/>

No sow-gelder did blow his horn<br/>

To geld a cat, but cry'd, Reform.<br/>

The oyster-women lock'd their fish up,                        540<br/>

And trudg'd away, to cry, No Bishop.<br/>

The mouse-trap men laid save-alls by,<br/>

And 'gainst Ev'l Counsellors did cry.<br/>

Botchers left old cloaths in the lurch,<br/>

And fell to turn and patch the Church.                        545<br/>

Some cry'd the Covenant instead<br/>

Of pudding-pies and ginger-bread;<br/>

And some for brooms, old boots and shoes,<br/>

Bawl'd out to Purge the Commons House.<br/>

Instead of kitchen-stuff, some cry,                           550<br/>

A Gospel-preaching Ministry;<br/>

And some, for old suits, coats, or cloak,<br/>

No Surplices nor Service-Book.<br/>

A strange harmonious inclination<br/>

Of all degrees to Reformation.                                555<br/>

And is this all? Is this the end<br/>

To which these carr'ings on did tend?<br/>

Hath public faith, like a young heir,<br/>

For this ta'en up all sorts of ware,<br/>

And run int' every tradesman's book,                          560<br/>

'Till both turn'd bankrupts, and are broke?<br/>

Did Saints for this bring in their plate,<br/>

And crowd as if they came too late?<br/>

For when they thought the Cause had need on't,<br/>

Happy was he that could be rid on't.                          565<br/>

Did they coin piss-pots, bowls, and flaggons,<br/>

Int' officers of horse and dragoons;<br/>

And into pikes and musquetteers<br/>

Stamp beakers, cups, and porringers!<br/>

A thimble, bodkin, and a spoon,                               570<br/>

Did start up living men as soon<br/>

As in the furnace they were thrown,<br/>

Just like the dragon's teeth b'ing sown.<br/>

Then was the Cause of gold and plate,<br/>

The Brethren's off'rings, consecrate,                         575<br/>

Like th' Hebrew calf, and down before it<br/>

The Saints fell prostrate, to adore it<br/>

So say the wicked — and will you<br/>

Make that &lt;m&gt; sarcasmus scandal true,<br/>

By running after dogs and bears?                              580<br/>

Beasts more unclean than calves or steers.<br/>

Have pow'rful Preachers ply'd their tongues,<br/>

And laid themselves out and their lungs;<br/>

Us'd all means, both direct and sinister,<br/>

I' th' pow'r of Gospel-preaching Minister?                    585<br/>

Have they invented tones to win<br/>

The women, and make them draw in<br/>

The men, as Indians with a female<br/>

Tame elephant inveigle the male?<br/>

Have they told Prov'dence what it must do,                    590<br/>

Whom to avoid, and whom to trust to?<br/>

Discover'd th' enemy's design,<br/>

And which way best to countermine?<br/>

Prescrib'd what ways it hath to work,<br/>

Or it will ne'er advance the Kirk?                            595<br/>

Told it the news o' th' last express,<br/>

And after good or bad success,<br/>

Made prayers, not so like petitions,<br/>

As overtures and propositions,<br/>

(Such as the army did present                                 600<br/>

To their creator, th' Parliament,)<br/>

In which they freely will confess<br/>

They will not, cannot acquiesce,<br/>

Unless the work be carry'd on<br/>

In the same way they have begun,                              605<br/>

By setting Church and Common-weal<br/>

All on a flame, bright as their zeal,<br/>

On which the Saints were all a-gog,<br/>

And all this for a bear and dog?<br/>

The parliament drew up petitions                              610<br/>

To itself, and sent them, like commissions,<br/>

To well-affected persons down,<br/>

In ev'ry city and great town,<br/>

With pow'r to levy horse and men,<br/>

Only to bring them back agen:                                 615<br/>

For this did many, many a mile,<br/>

Ride manfully in rank and file,<br/>

With papers in their hats, that show'd<br/>

As if they to the pillory rode.<br/>

Have all these courses, these efforts,                        620<br/>

Been try'd by people of all sorts,<br/>

Velis &amp; remis, omnibus nervis<br/>

And all t'advance the Cause's service?<br/>

And shall all now be thrown, away<br/>

In petulant intestine fray?                                   625<br/>

Shall we that in the Cov'nant swore,<br/>

Each man of us to run before<br/>

Another, still in Reformation,<br/>

Give dogs and bears a dispensation?<br/>

How will Dissenting Brethren relish it?                       630<br/>

What will malignants say? videlicet,<br/>

That each man Swore to do his best,<br/>

To damn and perjure all the rest!<br/>

And bid the Devil take the hin'most,<br/>

Which at this race is like to win most.                       635<br/>

They'll say our bus'ness, to reform<br/>

The Church and State, is but a worm;<br/>

For to subscribe, unsight, unseen,<br/>

To an unknown Church-discipline,<br/>

What is it else, but before-hand                              640<br/>

T'engage, and after understand?<br/>

For when we swore to carry on<br/>

The present Reformation,<br/>

According to the purest mode<br/>

Of Churches best reformed abroad,                             645<br/>

What did we else, but make a vow<br/>

To do we know not what, nor how?<br/>

For no three of us will agree,<br/>

Where or what Churches these should be;<br/>

And is indeed &lt;n&gt; the self-same case                          650<br/>

With theirs that swore et caeteras;<br/>

Or the &lt;o&gt; French League, in which men vow'd<br/>

To fight to the last drop of blood.<br/>

These slanders will be thrown upon<br/>

The Cause and Work we carry on,                               655<br/>

If we permit men to run headlong<br/>

T' exorbitances fit for Bedlam<br/>

Rather than Gospel-walking times,<br/>

When slightest sins are greatest crimes.<br/>

But we the matter so shall handle,                            660<br/>

As to remove that odious scandal.<br/>

In name of King and parliament,<br/>

I charge ye all; no more foment<br/>

This feud, but keep the peace between<br/>

Your brethren and your countrymen;                            665<br/>

And to those places straight repair<br/>

Where your respective dwellings are.<br/>

But to that purpose first surrender<br/>

The FIDDLER, as the prime offender,<br/>

Th' incendiary vile, that is chief                            670<br/>

Author and engineer of mischief;<br/>

That makes division between friends,<br/>

For profane and malignant ends.<br/>

He, and that engine of vile noise,<br/>

On which illegally he plays,                                  675<br/>

Shall (dictum factum) both be brought<br/>

To condign punishment, as they ought.<br/>

This must be done; and I would fain see<br/>

Mortal so sturdy as to gain-say:<br/>

For then I'll take another course,                            680<br/>

And soon reduce you all by force.<br/>

This said, he clapp'd his hand on sword,<br/>

To shew he meant to keep his word.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00148">But TALGOL, who had long supprest<br/>

Inflamed wrath in glowing, breast,                            685<br/>

Which now began to rage and burn as<br/>

Implacably as flame in furnace,<br/>

Thus answer'd him: — Thou vermin wretched<br/>

As e'er in measled pork was hatched;<br/>

Thou tail of worship, that dost grow                          690<br/>

On rump of justice as of cow;<br/>

How dar'st thou, with that sullen luggage<br/>

O' th' self, old ir'n, and other baggage,<br/>

With which thy steed of bones and leather<br/>

Has broke his wind in halting hither;                         695<br/>

How durst th', I say, adventure thus<br/>

T' oppose thy lumber against us?<br/>

Could thine impertinence find out<br/>

To work t' employ itself about,<br/>

Where thou, secure from wooden blow,                          700<br/>

Thy busy vanity might'st show?<br/>

Was no dispute a-foot between<br/>

The caterwauling Brethren?<br/>

No subtle question rais'd among                               705<br/>

Those out-o-their wits, and those i' th' wrong;<br/>

No prize between those combatants<br/>

O' th' times, the Land and Water Saints;<br/>

Where thou might'st stickle without hazard<br/>

Of outrage to thy hide and mazzard;<br/>

And not for want of bus'ness come                             710<br/>

To us to be so troublesome,<br/>

To interrupt our better sort<br/>

Of disputants, and spoil our sport?<br/>

Was there no felony, no bawd,<br/>

Cut-purse, no burglary abroad;                                715<br/>

No stolen pig, nor plunder'd goose,<br/>

To tie thee up from breaking loose?<br/>

No ale unlicens'd, broken hedge,<br/>

For which thou statute might'st alledge,<br/>

To keep thee busy from foul evil,                             720<br/>

And shame due to thee from the Devil?<br/>

Did no committee sit, where he<br/>

Might cut out journey-work for thee?<br/>

And set th' a task, with subornation,<br/>

To stitch up sale and sequestration;                          725<br/>

To cheat, with holiness and zeal,<br/>

All parties, and the common-weal?<br/>

Much better had it been for thee,<br/>

H' had kept thee where th' art us'd to be;<br/>

Or sent th' on bus'ness any whither,                          730<br/>

So he had never brought thee hither.<br/>

But if th' hast brain enough in skull<br/>

To keep itself in lodging whole,<br/>

And not provoke the rage of stones<br/>

And cudgels to thy hide and bones                             735<br/>

Tremble, and vanish, while thou may'st,<br/>

Which I'll not promise if thou stay'st.<br/>

At this the Knight grew high in wroth,<br/>

And lifting hands and eyes up both,<br/>

Three times he smote on stomach stout,                        740<br/>

From whence at length these words broke out:<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00149">Was I for this entitled SIR,<br/>

And girt with trusty sword and spur,<br/>

For fame and honor to wage battle,<br/>

Thus to be brav'd by foe to cattle?                           745<br/>

Not all that pride that makes thee swell<br/>

As big as thou dost blown-up veal;<br/>

Nor all thy tricks and sleights to cheat,<br/>

And sell thy carrion for good meat;<br/>

Not all thy magic to repair                                   750<br/>

Decay'd old age in tough lean ware;<br/>

Make nat'ral appear thy work,<br/>

And stop the gangrene in stale pork;<br/>

Not all that force that makes thee proud,<br/>

Because by bullock ne'er withstood;                           755<br/>

Though arm'd with all thy cleavers, knives,<br/>

And axes made to hew down lives,<br/>

Shall save or help thee to evade<br/>

The hand of Justice, or this blade,<br/>

Which I, her sword-bearer, do carry,                          760<br/>

For civil deed and military.<br/>

Nor shall those words of venom base,<br/>

Which thou hast from their native place,<br/>

Thy stomach, pump'd to fling on me,<br/>

Go unreveng'd, though I am free:                              765<br/>

Thou down the same throat shalt devour 'em,<br/>

Like tainted beef, and pay dear for 'em.<br/>

Nor shall it e'er be said, that wight<br/>

With gantlet blue, and bases white,<br/>

And round blunt truncheon by his side,                        770<br/>

So great a man at arms defy'd<br/>

With words far bitterer than wormwood,<br/>

That would in Job or Grizel stir mood.<br/>

Dogs with their tongues their wounds do heal;<br/>

But men with hands, as thou shalt feel.                       775<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00150">This said, with hasty rage he snatch'd<br/>

His gun-shot, that in holsters watch'd;<br/>

And bending cock, he levell'd full<br/>

Against th' outside of TALGOL'S skull;<br/>

Vowing that he shou'd ne'er stir further,                     780<br/>

Nor henceforth cow nor bullock murther.<br/>

But PALLAS came in shape of rust,<br/>

And 'twixt the spring and hammerthrust<br/>

Her Gorgon shield, which made the cock<br/>

Stand stiff, as t'were transform'd to stock.                  785<br/>

Mean while fierce TALGOL, gath'ring might,<br/>

With rugged truncheon charg'd the Knight;<br/>

But he with petronel upheav'd,<br/>

Instead of shield, the blow receiv'd.<br/>

The gun recoil'd, as well it might,                           790<br/>

Not us'd to such a kind of fight,<br/>

And shrunk from its great master's gripe,<br/>

Knock'd down and stunn'd by mortal stripe.<br/>

Then HUDIBRAS, with furious haste,<br/>

Drew out his sword; yet not so fast,                          795<br/>

But TALGOL first, with hardy thwack,<br/>

Twice bruis'd his head, and twice his back.<br/>

But when his nut-brown sword was out,<br/>

With stomach huge he laid about,<br/>

Imprinting many a wound upon                                  800<br/>

His mortal foe, the truncheon.<br/>

The trusty cudgel did oppose<br/>

Itself against dead-doing blows,<br/>

To guard its leader from fell bane,<br/>

And then reveng'd itself again.                               805<br/>

And though the sword (some understood)<br/>

In force had much the odds of wood,<br/>

'Twas nothing so; both sides were ballanc't<br/>

So equal, none knew which was valiant'st:<br/>

For wood with Honour b'ing engag'd,                           810<br/>

Is so implacably enrag'd,<br/>

Though iron hew and mangle sore,<br/>

Wood wounds and bruises Honour more.<br/>

And now both Knights were out of breath,<br/>

Tir'd in the hot pursuit of death;                            815<br/>

While all the rest amaz'd stood still,<br/>

Expecting which should take or kill.<br/>

This HUDIBRAS observ'd; and fretting<br/>

Conquest should be so long a getting,<br/>

He drew up all his force into                                 820<br/>

One body, and that into one blow.<br/>

But TALGOL wisely avoided it<br/>

By cunning sleight; for had it hit,<br/>

The upper part of him the blow<br/>

Had slit as sure as that below.                               825<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00151">Meanwhile th' incomparable COLON,<br/>

To aid his friend, began to fall on.<br/>

Him RALPH encounter'd, and straight grew<br/>

A dismal combat 'twixt them two:<br/>

Th' one arm'd with metal, th' other with wood;                830<br/>

This fit for bruise, and that for blood.<br/>

With many a stiff thwack, many a bang,<br/>

Hard crab-tree and old iron rang;<br/>

While none that saw them cou'd divine<br/>

To which side conquest would incline,                         835<br/>

Until MAGNANO, who did envy<br/>

That two should with so many men vie,<br/>

By subtle stratagem of brain,<br/>

Perform'd what force could ne'er attain;<br/>

For he, by foul hap, having found                             840<br/>

Where thistles grew on barren ground,<br/>

In haste he drew his weapon out,<br/>

And having cropp'd them from the root,<br/>

He clapp'd them underneath the tail<br/>

Of steed, with pricks as sharp as nail.                       845<br/>

The angry beast did straight resent<br/>

The wrong done to his fundament;<br/>

Began to kick, and fling, and wince,<br/>

As if h' had been beside his sense,<br/>

Striving to disengage from thistle,                           850<br/>

That gall'd him sorely under his tail:<br/>

Instead of which, he threw the pack<br/>

Of Squire and baggage from his back;<br/>

And blund'ring still with smarting rump,<br/>

He gave the Knight's steed such a thump                       855<br/>

As made him reel. The Knight did stoop,<br/>

And sat on further side aslope.<br/>

This TALGOL viewing, who had now<br/>

By sleight escap'd the fatal blow,<br/>

He rally'd, and again fell to't;                              860<br/>

For catching foe by nearer foot,<br/>

He lifted with such might and strength,<br/>

As would have hurl'd him thrice his length,<br/>

And dash'd his brains (if any) out:<br/>

But MARS, that still protects the stout,                      865<br/>

In pudding-time came to his aid,<br/>

And under him the Bear convey'd;<br/>

The Bear, upon whose soft fur-gown<br/>

The Knight with all his weight fell down.<br/>

The friendly rug preserv'd the ground,                        870<br/>

And headlong Knight, from bruise or wound;<br/>

Like feather-bed betwixt a wall<br/>

And heavy brunt of cannon-ball.<br/>

As Sancho on a blanket fell,<br/>

And had no hurt, our's far'd as well                          875<br/>

In body; though his mighty spirit,<br/>

B'ing heavy, did not so well bear it,<br/>

The Bear was in a greater fright,<br/>

Beat down and worsted by the Knight.<br/>

He roar'd, and rak'd, and flung about,                        880<br/>

To shake off bondage from his snout.<br/>

His wrath inflam'd, boil'd o'er, and from<br/>

His jaws of death he threw the foam:<br/>

Fury in stranger postures threw him,<br/>

And more than herald ever drew him.                           885<br/>

He tore the earth which he had sav'd<br/>

From squelch of Knight, and storm'd and rav'd,<br/>

And vext the more because the harms<br/>

He felt were 'gainst the law of arms:<br/>

For men he always took to be                                  890<br/>

His friends, and dogs the enemy;<br/>

Who never so much hurt had done him,<br/>

As his own side did falling on him.<br/>

It griev'd him to the guts that they<br/>

For whom h' had fought so many a fray,                        895<br/>

And serv'd with loss of blood so long,<br/>

Shou'd offer such inhuman wrong;<br/>

Wrong of unsoldier-like condition;<br/>

For which he flung down his commission;<br/>

And laid about him, till his nose                             900<br/>

From thrall of ring and cord broke loose.<br/>

Soon as he felt himself enlarg'd,<br/>

Through thickest of his foes he charg'd,<br/>

And made way through th' amazed crew;<br/>

Some he o'erran, and some o'erthrew,                          905<br/>

But took none; for by hasty flight<br/>

He strove t' escape pursuit of Knight;<br/>

From whom he fled with as much haste<br/>

And dread as he the rabble chas'd.<br/>

In haste he fled, and so did they;                            910<br/>

Each and his fear a several way.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00152">CROWDERO only kept the field;<br/>

Not stirring from the place he held;<br/>

Though beaten down and wounded sore,<br/>

I' th' fiddle, and a leg that bore                            915<br/>

One side of him; not that of bone,<br/>

But much it's better, th' wooden one.<br/>

He spying HUDIBRAS lie strow'd<br/>

Upon the ground, like log of wood,<br/>

With fright of fall, supposed wound,                          920<br/>

And loss of urine, in a swound,<br/>

In haste he snatch'd the wooden limb,<br/>

That hurt i' the ankle lay by him,<br/>

And fitting it for sudden fight,<br/>

Straight drew it up t' attack the Knight;                     925<br/>

For getting up on stump and huckle,<br/>

He with the foe began to buckle;<br/>

Vowing to be reveng'd for breach<br/>

Of crowd and skin upon the wretch,<br/>

Sole author of all detriment                                  930<br/>

He and his fiddle underwent.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00153">But RALPHO (who had now begun<br/>

T' adventure resurrection<br/>

From heavy squelch, and had got up<br/>

Upon his legs, with sprained crup)                            935<br/>

Looking about, beheld pernicion<br/>

Approaching Knight from fell musician.<br/>

He snatch'd his whinyard up, that fled<br/>

When he was falling off his steed,<br/>

(As rats do from a falling house,)                            940<br/>

To hide itself from rage of blows;<br/>

And, wing'd with speed and fury, flew<br/>

To rescue Knight from black and blew;<br/>

Which, e'er he cou'd atchieve, his sconce<br/>

The leg encounter'd twice and once;                           945<br/>

And now 'twas rais'd to smite agen,<br/>

When RALPHO thrust himself between.<br/>

He took the blow upon his arm,<br/>

To shield the Knight from further harm;<br/>

And, joining wrath with force, bestow'd                       950<br/>

On th' wooden member such a load,<br/>

That down it fell, and with it bore<br/>

CROWDERO, whom it propp'd before.<br/>

To him the Squire right nimbly run,<br/>

And setting conquering foot upon                              955<br/>

His trunk, thus spoke: What desp'rate frenzy<br/>

Made thee (thou whelp of Sin!) to fancy<br/>

Thyself, and all that coward rabble,<br/>

T' encounter us in battle able?<br/>

How durst th', I say, oppose thy curship                      960<br/>

'Gainst arms, authority, and worship?<br/>

And HUDIBRAS or me provoke,<br/>

Though all thy limbs, were heart of oke,<br/>

And th' other half of thee as good<br/>

To bear out blows, as that of wood?                           965<br/>

Cou'd not the whipping-post prevail<br/>

With all its rhet'ric, nor the jail,<br/>

To keep from flaying scourge thy skin,<br/>

And ankle free from iron gin?<br/>

Which now thou shalt — But first our care                    970<br/>

Must see how HUDIBRAS doth fare.<br/>

This said, he gently rais'd the Knight,<br/>

And set him on his bum upright.<br/>

To rouse him from lethargic dump,<br/>

He tweak'd his nose; with gentle thump                        975<br/>

Knock'd on his breast, as if 't had been<br/>

To raise the spirits lodg'd within.<br/>

They, waken'd with the noise, did fly<br/>

From inward room to window eye,<br/>

And gently op'ning lid, the casement,                         980<br/>

Look'd out, but yet with some amazement.<br/>

This gladded RALPHO much to see,<br/>

Who thus bespoke the Knight: quoth he,<br/>

Tweaking his nose, You are, great Sir,<br/>

A self-denying conqueror;                                     985<br/>

As high, victorious, and great,<br/>

As e'er fought for the Churches yet,<br/>

If you will give yourself but leave<br/>

To make out what y' already have;<br/>

That's victory. The foe, for dread                            990<br/>

Of your nine-worthiness, is fled:<br/>

All, save CROWDERO, for whose sake<br/>

You did th' espous'd Cause undertake;<br/>

And he lies pris'ner at your feet,<br/>

To be dispos'd as you think meet;                             995<br/>

Either for life, or death, or sale,<br/>

The gallows, or perpetual jail;<br/>

For one wink of your powerful eye<br/>

Must sentence him to live or die.<br/>

His fiddle is your proper purchase,                          1000<br/>

Won in the service of the Churches;<br/>

And by your doom must be allow'd<br/>

To be, or be no more, a crowd.<br/>

For though success did not confer<br/>

Just title on the conqueror;                                 1005<br/>

Though dispensations were not strong<br/>

Conclusions, whether right or wrong,<br/>

Although out-goings did confirm,<br/>

And owning were but a mere term;<br/>

Yet as the wicked have no right                              1010<br/>

To th' creature, though usurp'd by might,<br/>

The property is in the Saint,<br/>

From whom th' injuriously detain 't;<br/>

Of him they hold their luxuries,<br/>

Their dogs, their horses, whores, and dice,                  1015<br/>

Their riots, revels, masks, delights,<br/>

Pimps, buffoons, fiddlers, parasites;<br/>

All which the Saints have title to,<br/>

And ought t' enjoy, if th' had their due.<br/>

What we take from them is no more                            1020<br/>

Than what was our's by right before;<br/>

For we are their true landlords still,<br/>

And they our tenants but at will.<br/>

At this the Knight began to rouze,<br/>

And by degrees grow valorous.                                1025<br/>

He star'd about, and seeing none<br/>

Of all his foes remain, but one,<br/>

He snatch'd his weapon, that lay near him,<br/>

And from the ground began to rear him;<br/>

Vowing to make CROWDERO pay                                  1030<br/>

For all the rest that ran away.<br/>

But RALPHO now, in colder blood,<br/>

His fury mildly thus withstood:<br/>

Great Sir, quoth he, your mighty spirit<br/>

Is rais'd too high: this slave does merit                    1035<br/>

To be the hangman's bus'ness, sooner<br/>

Than from your hand to have the honour<br/>

Of his destruction. I, that am<br/>

A nothingness in deed and name<br/>

Did scorn to hurt his forfeit carcase,                       1040<br/>

Or ill intreat his fiddle or case:<br/>

Will you, great Sir, that glory blot<br/>

In cold blood which you gain'd in hot?<br/>

Will you employ your conqu'ring sword<br/>

To break a fiddle and your word?                             1045<br/>

For though I fought, and overcame,<br/>

And quarter gave, 'twas in your name.<br/>

For great commanders only own<br/>

What's prosperous by the soldier done.<br/>

To save, where you have pow'r to kill,                       1050<br/>

Argues your pow'r above your will;<br/>

And that your will and pow'r have less<br/>

Than both might have of selfishness.<br/>

This pow'r which, now alive, with dread<br/>

He trembles at, if he were dead,                             1055<br/>

Wou'd no more keep the slave in awe,<br/>

Than if you were a Knight of straw:<br/>

For death would then be his conqueror;<br/>

Not you, and free him from that terror.<br/>

If danger from his life accrue;                              1060<br/>

Or honour from his death, to you,<br/>

'Twere policy, and honour too,<br/>

To do as you resolv'd to do:<br/>

But, Sir, 'twou'd wrong your valour much,<br/>

To say it needs or fears a crutch.                           1065<br/>

Great conquerors greater glory gain<br/>

By foes in triumph led, than slain:<br/>

The laurels that adorn their brows<br/>

Are pull'd from living not dead boughs,<br/>

And living foes: the greatest fame                           1070<br/>

Of cripple slain can be but lame.<br/>

One half of him's already slain,<br/>

The other is not worth your pain;<br/>

Th' honour can but on one side light,<br/>

As worship did, when y' were dubb'd Knight.                  1075<br/>

Wherefore I think it better far<br/>

To keep him prisoner of war;<br/>

And let him fast in bonds abide,<br/>

At court of Justice to be try'd;<br/>

Where, if he appear so bold and crafty,                      1080<br/>

There may be danger in his safety.<br/>

If any member there dislike<br/>

His face, or to his beard have pique;<br/>

Or if his death will save or yield,<br/>

Revenge or fright, it is reveal'd.                           1085<br/>

Though he has quarter, ne'er the less<br/>

Y' have power to hang him when you please.<br/>

This has been often done by some<br/>

Of our great conqu'rors, you know whom;<br/>

And has by most of us been held                              1090<br/>

Wise Justice, and to some reveal'd.<br/>

For words and promises, that yoke<br/>

The conqueror, are quickly broke;<br/>

Like SAMPSON's cuffs, though by his own<br/>

Direction and advice put on.                                 1095<br/>

For if we should fight for the CAUSE<br/>

By rules of military laws,<br/>

And only do what they call just,<br/>

The Cause would quickly fall to dust.<br/>

This we among ourselves may speak;                           1100<br/>

But to the wicked, or the weak,<br/>

We must be cautious to declare<br/>

Perfection-truths, such as these are.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00154">This said, the high outrageous mettle<br/>

Of Knight began to cool and settle.                          1105<br/>

He lik'd the Squire's advice, and soon<br/>

Resolv'd to see the business done<br/>

And therefore charg'd him first to bind<br/>

CROWDERO'S hands on rump behind,<br/>

And to its former place and use,                             1110<br/>

The wooden member to reduce<br/>

But force it take an oath before,<br/>

Ne'er to bear arms against him more.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00155">RALPHO dispatch'd with speedy haste,<br/>

And having ty'd CROWDERO fast,                               1115<br/>

He gave Sir Knight the end of cord,<br/>

To lead the captive of his sword<br/>

In triumph, whilst the steeds he caught,<br/>

And them to further service brought.<br/>

The Squire in state rode on before,                          1120<br/>

And on his nut-brown whinyard bore<br/>

The trophee-fiddle and the case,<br/>

Leaning on shoulder like a mace.<br/>

The Knight himself did after ride,<br/>

Leading CROWDERO by his side;                                1125<br/>

And tow'd him, if he lagg'd behind,<br/>

Like boat against the tide and wind.<br/>

Thus grave and solemn they march'd on,<br/>

Until quite thro' the town th' had gone;<br/>

At further end of which there stands                         1130<br/>

An ancient castle, that commands<br/>

Th' adjacent parts: in all the fabrick<br/>

You shall not see one stone nor a brick;<br/>

But all of wood; by pow'rful spell<br/>

Of magic made impregnable.                                   1135<br/>

There's neither iron-bar nor gate,<br/>

Portcullis, chain, nor bolt, nor grate,<br/>

And yet men durance there abide,<br/>

In dungeon scarce three inches wide;<br/>

With roof so low, that under it                              1140<br/>

They never stand, but lie or sit;<br/>

And yet so foul, that whoso is in,<br/>

Is to the middle-leg in prison;<br/>

In circle magical conflu'd,<br/>

With walls of subtile air and wind,                          1145<br/>

Which none are able to break thorough,<br/>

Until they're freed by head of borough.<br/>

Thither arriv'd, th' advent'rous Knight<br/>

And bold Squire from their steeds alight<br/>

At th' outward wall, near which there stands                 1150<br/>

A bastile, built to imprison hands;<br/>

By strange enchantment made to fetter<br/>

The lesser parts and free the greater;<br/>

For though the body may creep through,<br/>

The hands in grate are fast enough:                          1155<br/>

And when a circle 'bout the wrist<br/>

Is made by beadle exorcist,<br/>

The body feels the spur and switch,<br/>

As if 'twere ridden post by witch<br/>

At twenty miles an hour pace,                                1160<br/>

And yet ne'er stirs out of the place.<br/>

On top of this there is a spire,<br/>

On which Sir Knight first bids the Squire<br/>

The fiddle and its spoils, the case,<br/>

In manner of a trophee place.                                1165<br/>

That done, they ope the trap-door gate,<br/>

And let CROWDERO down thereat;<br/>

CROWDERO making doleful face,<br/>

Like hermit poor in pensive place.<br/>

To dungeon they the wretch commit,                           1170<br/>

And the survivor of his feet<br/>

But th' other, that had broke the peace<br/>

And head of Knighthood, they release;<br/>

Though a delinquent false and forged,<br/>

Yet be'ing a stranger, he's enlarged;                        1175<br/>

While his comrade, that did no hurt,<br/>

Is clapp'd up fast in prison for't.<br/>

So Justice, while she winks at crimes,<br/>

Stumbles on innocence sometimes.<br/>
</p>

<h3 id="id00156" style="margin-top: 3em">NOTES TO PART I. CANTO II.</h3>

<p id="id00157" style="margin-top: 2em">47 x That is to say, whether Tollulation,
     As they do term't, or Succussation.
Tollulation and succussation are only Latin words for ambling
and trotting; though I believe both were natural amongst the old
Romans; since I never read they made use of the trammel, or
any other art, to pace their horses.</p>

<p id="id00158">60 y As Indian Britons, &amp;c.] The American Indians call a great
bird they have, with a white head, a penguin, which signifies the
same thing in the British tongue: from whence (with other
words of the same kind) some authors have endeavoured to
prove, that the Americans are originally derived from the
Britons.</p>

<p id="id00159">65 z The dire, &amp;c.] Pharsalia is a city of Thessaly, famous for
the battle won by Julius Caesar against Pompey the Great, in
the neighbouring plains, in the 607th year of Rome, of which
read Lucan's Pharsalia.</p>

<p id="id00160">129 a Chiron, the &amp;c.] Chiron, a Centaur, son to Saturn and
Phillyris, living in the mountains, where, being much given to
hunting, he became very knowing in the virtues of plants and
one of the most famous physicians of his time. He imparted his
skill to AEsculapius and was afterwards Apollo's governor,
until being wounded by Hercules, and desiring to die, Jupiter
placed him in heaven, where he forms the sign of Sagittarius or
the Archer.</p>

<p id="id00161">133 b In Staffordshire, where virtuous Worth
      Does raise the Minstrelsy, not Birth, &amp;c.
The whole history of this ancient ceremony you may read at
large in Dr. Plot's History of Staffordshire, under the town
Tutbury.</p>

<p id="id00162">155 c Grave as, &amp;c.] For the history of Pegu, read Mandelsa
and Olearius's Travels.</p>

<p id="id00163">172 In military, &amp;c.] Paris Garden, in Southwark, took its name
from the possessor.</p>

<p id="id00164">231 Though by, &amp;c.] Promethean fire. Prometheus was the son
of Iapetus, and brother of Atlas, concerning whom the poets
have feigned, that having first formed men of the earth and
water, he stole fire from heaven to put life into them; and that
having thereby displeased Jupiter, he commanded Vulcan to tie
him to mount Caucasus with iron chains, and that a vulture
should prey upon his liver continually: but the truth of the story
is, that Prometheus was an astrologer, and constant in observing
the stars upon that mountain; and, that, among other things, he
found the art of making fire, either by the means of a flint, or by
contracting the sun-beams in a glass. Bochart will have Magog,
in the Scripture, to be the Prometheus of the Pagans.</p>

<p id="id00165">He here and before sarcastically derides those who were great
admirers of the sympathetic powder and weapon salve, which
were in great repute in those days, and much promoted by the
great Sir Kenelm Digby, who wrote a treatise ex professo [of his
own knowledge] on that subject, and, I believe, thought what he
wrote to be true, which since has been almost exploded out of
the world.</p>

<p id="id00166">267 And 'mong, &amp;c.] Cossacks are a people that live near
Poland. This name was given them for their extraordinary
nimbleness; for cosa, or kosa, in the Polish tongue, signifies a
goat. He that would know more of them, may read Le Laboreur
and Thuldenus.</p>

<p id="id00167">275 And tho', &amp;c.] This custom of the Huns is described by
Ammianus Marcellinus, Hunni semicruda cujusvis Pecoris
carne vescuntur, quasi inter femora sua &amp; equorum terga
subsertam, calefacient brevi. P. 686. [The Huns stoutheartedly
eat half-raw meat, which is warned briefly by being hedl
between their thighs and their hoeses' backs.]</p>

<p id="id00168">283 - —  He spous'd in India,
    Of noble House, a Lady gay.
The Story in Le Blanc, of a bear that married a king's daughter,
is no more strange than many others, in most travellers, that
pass with allowance; for if they should write nothing but what is
possible, or probable, they might appear to have lost their
labour, and observed nothing but what they might have done as
well at home.</p>

<p id="id00169">343 In MAGIC he was deeply read,<br/>

    As he that made the Brazen-Head;<br/>

    Profoundly skill'd in the Black Art;<br/>

    As ENGLISH MERLIN for his Heart.<br/>

Roger Bacon and Merlin. See Collier's Dictionary.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00170">368 d As JOAN, &amp;c.] Two notorious women; the last was
known here by the name of Moll Cutpurse.</p>

<p id="id00171">378 e Than the Amazonian, &amp;c.] Penthesile, Queen of the
Amazons, succeeded Orythia. She carried succours to the
Trojans, and after having given noble proofs of her bravery, was
killed by Achilles. Pliny saith, it was she that invented the
battle-ax. If any one desire to know more of the Amazons, let
him read Mr. Sanson.</p>

<p id="id00172">385 f They wou'd not suffer the stout'st Dame
      To swear by HERCULES's Name.
The old Romans had particular oaths for men and women to
swear by, and therefore Macrobius says, Viri per Castorum non
jurabant antiquitus, nec Mulieres per Herculem; AEdepol
autem juramentum erat tum mulieribus, quam viris commune,
&amp;c. [Men did not swear by Castor in ancient times, nor women
by Hercules; however women swore by AEdepol as much as
men did.]</p>

<p id="id00173">393 g As stout, &amp;c.] Two formidable women at arms, in
romances, that were cudgelled into love by their gallants.</p>

<p id="id00174">395 h Of GUNDIBERT &amp;c.] Gundibert is a feigned name,
made use of by Sir William d' Avenant in his famous epic poem,
so called; wherein you may find also that of his mistress. This
poem was designed by the author to be an imitation of the
English Drama: it being divided into five books, as the other is
into five acts; the Cantos to be parallel of the scenes, with this
difference, that this is delivered narratively, the other
dialoguewise. It was ushered into the world by a large preface,
written by Mr. Hobbes, and by the pens of two of our best
poets, viz. Mr. Waller and Mr. Cowley, which one would have
thought might have proved a sufficient defence and protection
against snarling critics. Notwithstanding which, four eminent
wits of that age (two of which were Sir John Denham and Mr.
Donne) published several copies of verses to Sir William's
discredit, under this title, Certain Verses written by several of
the Author's Friends, to be reprinted with the second Edition of
Gundibert in 8vo. Lond. 1653. These verses were as wittily
answered by the author, under this title, The incomparable
Poem of Gundibert vindicated from the Wit Combat of four
Esquires, Clinias, Damoetas, Sancho, and Jack-Pudding;
printed in 8vo. Lond. 1665, Vide Langbain's Account of
Dramatic Poets.</p>

<p id="id00175">496 i What OEstrum, &amp;c.] OEstrum is not only a Greek word
for madness, but signifies also a gad-bee or horse-fly, that
torments cattle in the summer, and makes them run about as if
they were mad.</p>

<p id="id00176">525 k Wore in their Hats, &amp;c.] Some few days after the King
had accus'd the five Members of Treason in the House of
Commons, great Crowds of the rabble came down to
Westminster-Hall, with printed copies of the Protestation tied in
their hats like favours.</p>

<p id="id00177">526 l When 'twas resolv'd by either House
      Six Members Quarrel to espouse.
The six Members were the Lord Kimbolton, Mr. Pym, Mr.
Hollis, Mr. Hampden, Sir Arthur Haslerig, and Mr. Stroud,
whom the King ordered to be apprehended, and their papers
seized; charging them of plotting with the Scots, and favouring
the late tumults; but the House voted against the arrest of their
persons or papers; whereupon the King having preferred articles
against those Members, he went with his guard to the House to
demand them; but they, having notice,  withdrew.</p>

<p id="id00178">578 m Make that, &amp;c.] Abusive or insulting had been better; but
our Knight believed the learned language more convenient to
understand in than his own Mother-tongue.</p>

<p id="id00179">650 n And is indeed the self same Case
      With theirs that swore t' Et caeteras.
The Convocation, in one of the short Parliaments, that ushered
in the long one, (as dwarfs are wont to do knights-errant,) made
an oath to be taken by the clergy for observing canonical
obedience; in which they enjoined their brethren, out of the
abundance of their consciences, to swear to articles with, &amp;c.</p>

<p id="id00180">652 o Or the French League, in which men vow'd
      To fight to the last Drop of Blood.
The Holy League in France, designed and made for the
extirpation of the Protestant Religion, was the original out of
which the Solemn League and Covenant here was (with the
difference only of circumstances) most faithfully transcribed.
Nor did the success of both differ more than the intent and
purpose; for after the destruction of vast numbers of people of
all sorts, both ended with the murder of two Kings, whom they
had both sworn to defend: And as our Covenanters swore every
man to run one before another in the way of Reformation, so did
the French, in the Holy League, to fight to the last drop of
blood.</p>

<h3 id="id00181" style="margin-top: 3em">PART I.</h3>

<h4 id="id00182" style="margin-top: 2em">CANTO III.</h4>

<h4 id="id00183" style="margin-top: 2em">THE ARGUMENT.</h4>

<p id="id00184">————————————————————————-<br/>

The scatter'd rout return and rally,<br/>

Surround the place; the Knight does sally,<br/>

And is made pris'ner: Then they seize<br/>

Th' inchanted fort by storm; release<br/>

Crowdero, and put the Squire in's place;<br/>

I should have first said Hudibras.<br/>

————————————————————————-<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00185" style="margin-top: 2em">Ah me! what perils do environ<br/>

The man that meddles with cold iron!<br/>

What plaguy mischiefs and mishaps<br/>

Do dog him still with after-claps!<br/>

For though dame Fortune seem to smile                           5<br/>

And leer upon him for a while,<br/>

She'll after shew him, in the nick<br/>

Of all his glories, a dog-trick.<br/>

This any man may sing or say,<br/>

I' th' ditty call'd, What if a Day?                            10<br/>

For HUDIBRAS, who thought h' had won<br/>

The field, as certain as a gun;<br/>

And having routed the whole troop,<br/>

With victory was cock a-hoop;<br/>

Thinking h' had done enough to purchase                        15<br/>

Thanksgiving-day among the Churches,<br/>

Wherein his mettle, and brave worth,<br/>

Might be explain'd by Holder-forth,<br/>

And register'd, by fame eternal,<br/>

In deathless pages of diurnal;                                 20<br/>

Found in few minutes, to his cost,<br/>

He did but count without his host;<br/>

And that a turn-stile is more certain<br/>

Than, in events of war, dame Fortune.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00186">For now the late faint-hearted rout,                           25<br/>

O'erthrown, and scatter'd round about,<br/>

Chas'd by the horror of their fear<br/>

From bloody fray of Knight and Bear,<br/>

(All but the dogs, who, in pursuit<br/>

Of the Knight's victory, stood to't,                           30<br/>

And most ignobly fought to get<br/>

The honour of his blood and sweat,)<br/>

Seeing the coast was free and clear<br/>

O' th' conquer'd and the conqueror,<br/>

Took heart again, and fac'd about,                             35<br/>

As if they meant to stand it out:<br/>

For by this time the routed Bear,<br/>

Attack'd by th' enemy i' th' rear,<br/>

Finding their number grew too great<br/>

For him to make a safe retreat,                                40<br/>

Like a bold chieftain, fac'd about;<br/>

But wisely doubting to hold out,<br/>

Gave way to Fortune, and with haste<br/>

Fac'd the proud foe, and fled, and fac'd;<br/>

Retiring still, until he found                                 45<br/>

H' had got the advantage of the ground;<br/>

And then as valiantly made head<br/>

To check the foe, and forthwith fled;<br/>

Leaving no art untry'd, nor trick<br/>

Of warrior stout and politick,                                 50<br/>

Until, in spite of hot pursuit,<br/>

He gain'd a pass to hold dispute<br/>

On better terms, and stop the course<br/>

Of the proud foe. With all his force<br/>

He bravely charg'd, and for a while                            55<br/>

Forc'd their whole body to recoil;<br/>

But still their numbers so increas'd,<br/>

He found himself at length oppress'd,<br/>

And all evasions, so uncertain,<br/>

To save himself for better fortune,                            60<br/>

That he resolv'd, rather than yield,<br/>

To die with honour in the field,<br/>

And sell his hide and carcase at<br/>

A price as high and desperate<br/>

As e'er he could. This resolution                              65<br/>

He forthwith put in execution,<br/>

And bravely threw himself among<br/>

The enemy i' th' greatest throng.<br/>

But what cou'd single valour do<br/>

Against so numerous a foe?                                     70<br/>

Yet much he did indeed, too much<br/>

To be believ'd, where th' odds were such.<br/>

But one against a multitude<br/>

Is more than mortal can make good.<br/>

For while one party he oppos'd,                                75<br/>

His rear was suddenly inclos'd;<br/>

And no room left him for retreat,<br/>

Or fight against a foe so great.<br/>

For now the mastives, charging home,<br/>

To blows and handy gripes were come:                           80<br/>

While manfully himself he bore,<br/>

And setting his right-foot before,<br/>

He rais'd himself, to shew how tall<br/>

His person was above them all.<br/>

This equal shame and envy stirr'd                              85<br/>

In th' enemy, that one should beard<br/>

So many warriors, and so stout,<br/>

As he had done, and stav'd it out,<br/>

Disdaining to lay down his arms,<br/>

And yield on honourable terms.                                 90<br/>

Enraged thus, some in the rear<br/>

Attack'd him, and some ev'ry where,<br/>

Till down he fell; yet falling fought,<br/>

And, being down, still laid about;<br/>

As WIDDRINGTON, in doleful dumps,                              95<br/>

Is said to light upon his stumps.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00187">But all, alas! had been in vain,<br/>

And he inevitably slain,<br/>

If TRULLA and CERDON, in the nick,<br/>

To rescue him had not been quick;                             100<br/>

For TRULLA, who was light of foot<br/>

As shafts which long-field Parthians shoot,<br/>

(But not so light as to be borne<br/>

Upon the ears of standing corn,<br/>

Or trip it o'er the water quicker                             105<br/>

Than witches, when their staves they liquor,<br/>

As some report,) was got among<br/>

The foremost of the martial throng;<br/>

There pitying the vanquish'd Bear,<br/>

She call'd to CERDON, who stood near,                         110<br/>

Viewing the bloody fight; to whom,<br/>

Shall we (quoth she) stand still hum-drum,<br/>

And see stout Bruin all alone,<br/>

By numbers basely overthrown?<br/>

Such feats already h' has atchiev'd,                          115<br/>

In story not to be believ'd;<br/>

And 'twould to us be shame enough,<br/>

Not to attempt to fetch him off.<br/>

I would (quoth he) venture a limb<br/>

To second thee, and rescue him:                               120<br/>

But then we must about it straight,<br/>

Or else our aid will come too late.<br/>

Quarter he scorns, he is so stout,<br/>

And therefore cannot long hold out.<br/>

This said, they wav'd their weapons round                     125<br/>

About their heads, to clear the ground;<br/>

And joining forces, laid about<br/>

So fiercely, that th' amazed rout<br/>

Turn'd tale again, and straight begun,<br/>

As if the Devil drove, to run.                                130<br/>

Meanwhile th' approach'd th' place where Bruin<br/>

Was now engag'd to mortal ruin.<br/>

The conqu'ring foe they soon assail'd;<br/>

First TRULLA &lt;p&gt; stav'd, and CERDON tail'd,<br/>

Until their mastives loos'd their hold:                       135<br/>

And yet, alas! do what they could,<br/>

The worsted Bear came off with store<br/>

Of bloody wounds, but all before:<br/>

For as ACHILLES, dipt in pond,<br/>

Was ANABAPTIZ'D free from wound,                              140<br/>

Made proof against dead-doing steel<br/>

All over, but the Pagan heel;<br/>

So did our champion's arms defend<br/>

All of him, but the other end,<br/>

His head and ears, which, in the martial                      145<br/>

Encounter, lost a leathern parcel<br/>

For as an Austrian Archduke once<br/>

Had one ear (which in ducatoons<br/>

Is half the coin) in battle par'd<br/>

Close to his head, so Bruin far'd;                            150<br/>

But tugg'd and pull'd on th' other side,<br/>

Like scriv'ner newly crucify'd;<br/>

Or like the late &lt;q&gt; corrected leathern<br/>

Ears of the Circumcised Brethren.<br/>

But gentle TRULLA into th' ring                               155<br/>

He wore in's nose convey'd a string,<br/>

With which she march'd before, and led<br/>

The warrior to a grassy bed,<br/>

As authors write, in a cool shade,<br/>

Which eglantine and roses made;                               160<br/>

Close by a softly murm'ring stream,<br/>

Where lovers us'd to loll and dream.<br/>

There leaving him to his repose,<br/>

Secured from pursuit of foes,<br/>

And wanting nothing but a song,                               165<br/>

And a well-tun'd theorbo hung<br/>

Upon a bough, to ease the pain<br/>

His tugg'd ears suffer'd, with a strain,<br/>

They both drew up, to march in quest<br/>

Of his great leader and the rest.                             170<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00188">For ORSIN (who was more renown'd<br/>

For stout maintaining of his ground<br/>

In standing fight, than for pursuit,<br/>

As being not so quick of foot)<br/>

Was not long able to keep pace                                175<br/>

With others that pursu'd the chace;<br/>

But found himself left far behind,<br/>

Both out of heart and out of wind:<br/>

Griev'd to behold his Bear pursu'd<br/>

So basely by a multitude;                                     180<br/>

And like to fall, not by the prowess,<br/>

But numbers of his coward foes.<br/>

He rag'd, and kept as heavy a coil as<br/>

Stout HERCULES for loss of HYLAS;<br/>

Forcing the vallies to repeat                                 185<br/>

The accents of his sad regret.<br/>

He beat his breast, and tore his hair,<br/>

For loss of his dear Crony Bear;<br/>

That Eccho, from the hollow ground,<br/>

His doleful wailings did resound                              190<br/>

More wistfully, by many times,<br/>

Than in small poets splay-foot rhimes<br/>

That make her, in their rueful stories<br/>

To answer to int'rogatories,<br/>

And most unconscionably depose                                195<br/>

To things of which she nothing knows;<br/>

And when she has said all she can say,<br/>

'Tis wrested to the lover's fancy.<br/>

Quoth he, O whither, wicked Bruin<br/>

Art thou fled to my —  Eccho, Ruin?                          200<br/>

I thought th' hadst scorn'd to budge a step<br/>

For fear. (Quoth Eccho) Marry guep.<br/>

Am not I here to take thy part?<br/>

Then what has quelled thy stubborn heart?<br/>

Have these bones rattled, and this head                       205<br/>

So often in thy quarrel bled?<br/>

Nor did I ever winch or grudge it,<br/>

For thy dear sake. (Quoth she) Mum budget<br/>

Think'st thou 'twill not be laid i' th' dish<br/>

Thou turn'dst thy back? Quoth Eccho, Fish.                    210<br/>

To run from those t'hast overcome<br/>

Thus cowardly? Quoth Eccho, Mum.<br/>

But what a vengeance makes thee fly<br/>

From me too, as thine enemy?<br/>

Or if thou hast no thought of me,                             215<br/>

Nor what I have endur'd for thee,<br/>

Yet shame and honour might prevail<br/>

To keep thee thus from turning tail:<br/>

For who would grudge to spend his blood in<br/>

His honour's cause? Quoth she, A puddin.                      220<br/>

This said, his grief to anger turn'd,<br/>

Which in his manly stomach burn'd;<br/>

Thirst of revenge, and wrath, in place<br/>

Of sorrow, now began to blaze.<br/>

He vow'd the authors of his woe                               225<br/>

Should equal vengeance undergo;<br/>

And with their bones and flesh pay dear<br/>

For what he suffer'd, and his Bear.<br/>

This b'ing resolv'd, with equal speed<br/>

And rage he hasted to proceed                                 230<br/>

To action straight, and giving o'er<br/>

To search for Bruin any more,<br/>

He went in quest of HUDIBRAS,<br/>

To find him out where-e'er he was;<br/>

And, if he were above ground, vow'd                           235<br/>

He'd ferret him, lurk where be wou'd.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00189">But scarce had he a furlong on<br/>

This resolute adventure gone,<br/>

When he encounter'd with that crew<br/>

Whom HUDIBRAS did late subdue.                                240<br/>

Honour, revenge, contempt, and shame,<br/>

Did equally their breasts inflame.<br/>

'Mong these the fierce MAGNANO was,<br/>

And TALGOL, foe to HUDIBRAS;<br/>

CERDON and COLON, warriors stout,                             245<br/>

As resolute, as ever fought;<br/>

Whom furious ORSIN thus bespoke:<br/>

Shall we (quoth be) thus basely brook<br/>

The vile affront that paltry ass,<br/>

And feeble scoundrel, HUDIBRAS,                               250<br/>

With that more paltry ragamuffin,<br/>

RALPHO, with vapouring and huffing,<br/>

Have put upon us like tame cattle,<br/>

As if th' had routed us in battle?<br/>

For my part, it shall ne'er be said,                          255<br/>

I for the washing gave my bead:<br/>

Nor did I turn my back for fear<br/>

O' th' rascals, but loss of my Bear,<br/>

Which now I'm like to undergo;<br/>

For whether those fell wounds, or no                          260<br/>

He has receiv'd in fight, are mortal,<br/>

Is more than all my skill can foretell<br/>

Nor do I know what is become<br/>

Of him, more than the Pope of Rome.<br/>

But if I can but find them out                                265<br/>

That caus'd it (as I shall, no doubt,<br/>

Where-e'er th' in hugger-mugger lurk)<br/>

I'll make them rue their handy-work;<br/>

And wish that they had rather dar'd<br/>

To pull the Devil by the beard.                               270<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00190">Quoth CERD0N, Noble ORSIN, th' hast<br/>

Great reason to do as thou say'st,<br/>

And so has ev'ry body here,<br/>

As well as thou hast, or thy Bear.<br/>

Others may do as they see good;                               275<br/>

But if this twig be made of wood<br/>

That will hold tack, I'll make the fur<br/>

Fly 'bout the ears of that old cur;<br/>

And the other mungrel vermin, RALPH,<br/>

That brav'd us all in his behalf.                             280<br/>

Thy Bear is safe, and out of peril,<br/>

Though lugg'd indeed, and wounded very ill;<br/>

Myself and TRULLA made a shift<br/>

To help him out at a dead lift;<br/>

And, having brought him bravely off,                          285<br/>

Have left him where he's safe enough:<br/>

There let him rest; for if we stay,<br/>

The slaves may hap to get away.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00191">This said, they all engag'd to join<br/>

Their forces in the same design;                              290<br/>

And forthwith put themselves in search<br/>

Of HUDIBRAS upon their march.<br/>

Where leave we awhile, to tell<br/>

What the victorious knight befel.<br/>

For such, CROWDERO being fast                                 295<br/>

In dungeon shut, we left him last.<br/>

Triumphant laurels seem'd to grow<br/>

No where so green as on his brow;<br/>

Laden with which, as well as tir'd<br/>

With conquering toil, he now retir'd                          300<br/>

Unto a neighb'ring castle by,<br/>

To rest his body, and apply<br/>

Fit med'cines to each glorious bruise<br/>

He got in fight, reds, blacks, and blues,<br/>

To mollify th' uneasy pang                                    305<br/>

Of ev'ry honourable bang,<br/>

Which b'ing by skilful midwife drest,<br/>

He laid him down to take his rest.<br/>

But all in vain. H' had got a hurt<br/>

O' th' inside, of a deadlier sort,                            310<br/>

By CUPID made, who took his stand<br/>

Upon a Widow's jointure land,<br/>

(For he, in all his am'rous battels,<br/>

No 'dvantage finds like goods and chattels,)<br/>

Drew home his bow, and, aiming right,                         315<br/>

Let fly an arrow at the Knight:<br/>

The shaft against a rib did glance,<br/>

And gall'd him in the purtenance.<br/>

But time had somewhat 'swag'd his pain,<br/>

After he found his suit in vain.                              320<br/>

For that proud dame, for whom his soul<br/>

Was burnt in's belly like a coal,<br/>

(That belly which so oft did ake<br/>

And suffer griping for her sake,<br/>

Till purging comfits and ants-eggs                            325<br/>

Had almost brought him off his legs,)<br/>

Us'd him so like a base rascallion,<br/>

That &lt;r&gt; old Pyg — (what d'y' call him) malion,<br/>

That cut his mistress out of stone,<br/>

Had not so hard a-hearted one.                                330<br/>

She had a thousand jadish tricks,<br/>

Worse than a mule that flings and kicks;<br/>

'Mong which one cross-grain'd freak she had,<br/>

As insolent as strange and mad;<br/>

She could love none, but only such                            335<br/>

As scorn'd and hated her as much.<br/>

'Twas a strange riddle of a lady:<br/>

Not love, if any lov'd her! Hey dey!<br/>

So cowards never use their might,<br/>

But against such as will not fight;                           340<br/>

So some diseases have been found<br/>

Only to seize upon the sound.<br/>

He that gets her by heart, must say her<br/>

The back way, like a witch's prayer.<br/>

Mean while the Knight had no small task                       345<br/>

To compass what he durst not ask.<br/>

He loves, but dares not make the motion;<br/>

Her ignorance is his devotion:<br/>

Like caitiff vile, that, for misdeed,<br/>

Rides with his face to rump of steed,                         350<br/>

Or rowing scull, he's fain to love,<br/>

Look one way, and another move;<br/>

Or like a tumbler, that does play<br/>

His game, and look another way,<br/>

Until he seize upon the cony;                                 355<br/>

Just so he does by matrimony:<br/>

But all in vain; her subtle snout<br/>

Did quickly wind his meaning out;<br/>

Which she return'd with too much scorn<br/>

To be by man of honour borne:                                 360<br/>

Yet much he bore, until the distress<br/>

He suffer'd from his spightful mistress<br/>

Did stir his stomach; and the pain<br/>

He had endur'd from her disdain,<br/>

Turn'd to regret so resolute,                                 365<br/>

That he resolv'd to wave his suit,<br/>

And either to renounce her quite,<br/>

Or for a while play least in sight.<br/>

This resolution b'ing put on,<br/>

He kept some months, and more had done;                       370<br/>

But being brought so nigh by Fate,<br/>

The victory he atchiev'd so late<br/>

Did set his thoughts agog, and ope<br/>

A door to discontinu'd hope,<br/>

That seem'd to promise he might win                           375<br/>

His dame too, now his hand was in;<br/>

And that his valour, and the honour<br/>

H' had newly gain'd, might work upon her.<br/>

These reasons made his mouth to water<br/>

With am'rous longings to be at her.                           380<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00192">Quoth he, unto himself, Who knows,<br/>

But this brave conquest o'er my foes<br/>

May reach her heart, and make that stoop,<br/>

As I but now have forc'd the troop?<br/>

If nothing can oppugn love,                                   385<br/>

And virtue invious ways can prove,<br/>

What may he not confide to do<br/>

That brings both love and virtue too?<br/>

But thou bring'st valour too and wit;<br/>

Two things that seldom fail to hit.                           390<br/>

Valour's a mouse-trap, wit a gin,<br/>

Which women oft are taken in.<br/>

Then, HUDIBRAS, why should'st thou fear<br/>

To be, that art a conqueror?<br/>

Fortune th' audacious doth juvare,                            395<br/>

But lets the timidous miscarry.<br/>

Then while the honour thou hast got<br/>

Is spick and span new, piping hot,<br/>

Strike her up bravely, thou hadst best,<br/>

And trust thy fortune with the rest.                          400<br/>

Such thoughts as these the Knight did keep,<br/>

More than his bangs or fleas, from sleep.<br/>

And as an owl, that in a barn<br/>

Sees a mouse creeping in the corn,<br/>

Sits still, and shuts his round blue eyes,                    405<br/>

As if he slept, until he spies<br/>

The little beast within his reach,<br/>

Then starts, and seizes on the wretch;<br/>

So from his couch the Knight did start<br/>

To seize upon the widow's heart;                              410<br/>

Crying with hasty tone, and hoarse,<br/>

RALPHO, dispatch; To Horse, To Horse.<br/>

And 'twas but time; for now the rout,<br/>

We left engag'd to seek him out,<br/>

By speedy marches, were advanc'd                              415<br/>

Up to the fort, where he ensconc'd;<br/>

And all th' avenues had possest<br/>

About the place, from east to west.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00193">That done, a while they made a halt,<br/>

To view the ground, and where t' assault:                     420<br/>

Then call'd a council, which was best,<br/>

By siege or onslaught, to invest<br/>

The enemy; and 'twas agreed,<br/>

By storm and onslaught to proceed.<br/>

This b'ing resolv'd, in comely sort                           425<br/>

They now drew up t' attack the fort;<br/>

When HUDIBRAS, about to enter<br/>

Upon another-gates adventure,<br/>

To RALPHO call'd aloud to arm,<br/>

Not dreaming of approaching storm.                            430<br/>

Whether Dame Fortune, or the care<br/>

Of Angel bad or tutelar,<br/>

Did arm, or thrust him on a danger<br/>

To which he was an utter stranger;<br/>

That foresight might, or might not, blot                      435<br/>

The glory he had newly got;<br/>

For to his shame it might be said,<br/>

They took him napping in his bed;<br/>

To them we leave it to expound,<br/>

That deal in sciences profound.                               440<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00194">His courser scarce he had bestrid,<br/>

And RALPHO that on which he rid,<br/>

When setting ope the postern gate,<br/>

Which they thought best to sally at,<br/>

The foe appear'd, drawn up and drill'd,                       445<br/>

Ready to charge them in the field.<br/>

This somewhat startled the bold Knight,<br/>

Surpriz'd with th' unexpected sight.<br/>

The bruises of his bones and flesh<br/>

The thought began to smart afresh;                            450<br/>

Till recollecting wonted courage,<br/>

His fear was soon converted to rage,<br/>

And thus he spoke: The coward foe,<br/>

Whom we but now gave quarter to,<br/>

Look, yonder's rally'd, and appears                           455<br/>

As if they had out-run their fears.<br/>

The glory we did lately get,<br/>

The Fates command us to repeat;<br/>

And to their wills we must succumb,<br/>

Quocunque trahunt, 'tis our doom.                             460<br/>

This is the same numeric crew<br/>

Which we so lately did subdue;<br/>

The self-same individuals that<br/>

Did run as mice do from a cat,<br/>

When we courageously did wield                                465<br/>

Our martial weapons in the field<br/>

To tug for victory; and when<br/>

We shall our shining blades agen<br/>

Brandish in terror o'er our heads,<br/>

They'll straight resume their wonted dreads.                  470<br/>

Fear is an ague, that forsakes<br/>

And haunts by fits those whom it takes:<br/>

And they'll opine they feel the pain<br/>

And blows they felt to-day again.<br/>

Then let us boldly charge them home,                          475<br/>

And make no doubt to overcome.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00195">This said, his courage to inflame,<br/>

He call'd upon his mistress' name.<br/>

His pistol next he cock'd a-new,<br/>

And out his nut-brown whinyard drew;                          480<br/>

And, placing RALPHO in the front,<br/>

Reserv'd himself to bear the brunt,<br/>

As expert warriors use: then ply'd<br/>

With iron heel his courser's side,<br/>

Conveying sympathetic speed                                   485<br/>

From heel of Knight to heel of Steed.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00196">Mean while the foe, with equal rage<br/>

And speed, advancing to engage,<br/>

Both parties now were drawn so close,<br/>

Almost to come to handy-blows;                                490<br/>

When ORSIN first let fly a stone<br/>

At RALPHO: not so huge a one<br/>

As that which DIOMED did maul<br/>

AENEAS on the bum withal<br/>

Yet big enough if rightly hurl'd,                             495<br/>

T' have sent him to another world,<br/>

Whether above-ground, or below,<br/>

Which Saints Twice Dipt are destin'd to.<br/>

The danger startled the bold Squire,<br/>

And made him some few steps retire.                           500<br/>

But HUDIBRAS advanc'd to's aid,<br/>

And rouz'd his spirits, half dismay'd.<br/>

He wisely doubting lest the shot<br/>

Of th' enemy, now growing hot,<br/>

Might at a distance gall, press'd close,                      505<br/>

To come pell-mell to handy-blows,<br/>

And, that he might their aim decline,<br/>

Advanc'd still in an oblique line;<br/>

But prudently forbore to fire,<br/>

Till breast to breast he had got nigher,                      510<br/>

As expert warriors use to do<br/>

When hand to hand they charge their foe.<br/>

This order the advent'rous Knight,<br/>

Most soldier-like, observ'd in fight,<br/>

When fortune (as she's wont) turn'd fickle,                   515<br/>

And for the foe began to stickle.<br/>

The more shame for her Goody-ship,<br/>

To give so near a friend the slip.<br/>

For COLON, choosing out a stone,<br/>

Levell'd so right, it thump'd upon                            520<br/>

His manly paunch with such a force,<br/>

As almost beat him off his horse.<br/>

He lost his whinyard, and the rein;<br/>

But, laying fast hold of the mane,<br/>

Preserv'd his seat; and as a goose                            525<br/>

In death contracts his talons close,<br/>

So did the Knight, and with one claw<br/>

The trigger of his pistol draw.<br/>

The gun went off: and as it was<br/>

Still fatal to stout HUDIBRAS,                                530<br/>

In all his feats of arms, when least<br/>

He dreamt of it, to prosper best,<br/>

So now he far'd: the shot, let fly<br/>

At random 'mong the enemy,<br/>

Pierc'd TALGOL's gaberdine, and grazing                       535<br/>

Upon his shoulder, in the passing,<br/>

Lodg'd in MAGNANO's brass habergeon,<br/>

Who straight, A Surgeon, cry'd, A Surgeon.<br/>

He tumbled down, and, as he fell,<br/>

Did Murther, Murther, Murther, yell.                          540<br/>

This startled their whole body so,<br/>

That if the Knight had not let go<br/>

His arms, but been in warlike plight,<br/>

H' had won (the second time) the fight;<br/>

As, if the Squire had but fall'n on,                          545<br/>

He had inevitably done:<br/>

But he, diverted with the care<br/>

Or HUDIBRAS his hurt, forbare<br/>

To press th' advantage of his fortune<br/>

While danger did the rest dishearten:                         550<br/>

For he with CERDON b'ing engag'd<br/>

In close encounter, they both wag'd<br/>

The fight so well, 'twas hard to say<br/>

Which side was like to get the day.<br/>

And now the busy work of death                                555<br/>

Had tir'd them so, th' agreed to breath,<br/>

Preparing to renew the fight,<br/>

When the disaster of the Knight,<br/>

And th' other party, did divert<br/>

Their fell intent, and forc'd them part.                      560<br/>

RALPHO press'd up to HUDIBRAS,<br/>

And CERDON where MAGNANO was;<br/>

Each striving to confirm his party<br/>

With stout encouragements, and hearty.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00197">Quoth RALIHO, Courage, valiant Sir,                           565<br/>

And let revenge and honour stir<br/>

Your spirits up: once we fall on,<br/>

The shatter'd foe begins to run:<br/>

For if but half so well you knew<br/>

To use your victory as subdue,                                570<br/>

They durst not, after such a blow<br/>

As you have given them, face us now;<br/>

But from so formidable a soldier<br/>

Had fled like crows when they smell powder.<br/>

Thrice have they seen your sword aloft                        575<br/>

Wav'd o'er their heads, and fled as oft.<br/>

But if you let them recollect<br/>

Their spirits, now dismay'd and checkt,<br/>

You'll have a harder game to play<br/>

Than yet y' have had to get the day.                          580<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00198">Thus spoke the stout Squire; but was heard<br/>

By HUDIBRAS with small regard.<br/>

His thoughts were fuller of the bang<br/>

Be lately took than RALPH'S harangue;<br/>

To which he answer'd, Cruel Fate                              585<br/>

Tells me thy counsel comes too late.<br/>

The knotted blood within my hose,<br/>

That from my wounded body flows,<br/>

With mortal crisis doth portend<br/>

My days to appropinque an end.                                590<br/>

I am for action now unfit,<br/>

Either of fortitude or wit:<br/>

Fortune, my foe, begins to frown,<br/>

Resolv'd to pull my stomach down.<br/>

I am not apt, upon a wound,                                   595<br/>

Or trivial basting, to despond:<br/>

Yet I'd be loth my days to curtail:<br/>

For if I thought my wounds not mortal,<br/>

Or that we'd time enough as yet,<br/>

To make an hon'rable retreat,                                 600<br/>

'Twere the best course: but if they find<br/>

We fly, and leave our arms behind<br/>

For them to seize on, the dishonour,<br/>

And danger too, is such, I'll sooner<br/>

Stand to it boldly, and take quarter,                         605<br/>

To let them see I am no starter.<br/>

In all the trade of war, no feat<br/>

Is nobler than a brave retreat:<br/>

For those that run away, and fly,<br/>

Take place at least of th' enemy.                             610<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00199">This said, the Squire, with active speed<br/>

Dismounted from his bonny steed,<br/>

To seize the arms, which, by mischance,<br/>

Fell from the bold Knight in a trance.<br/>

These being found out, and restor'd                           615<br/>

To HUDIBRAS their natural lord,<br/>

As a man may say, with might and main,<br/>

He hasted to get up again.<br/>

Thrice he assay'd to mount aloft,<br/>

But, by his weighty bum, as oft                               620<br/>

He was pull'd back, till having found<br/>

Th' advantage of the rising ground,<br/>

Thither he led his warlike steed,<br/>

And having plac'd him right, with speed<br/>

Prepar'd again to scale the beast,                            625<br/>

When ORSIN, who had newly drest<br/>

The bloody scar upon the shoulder<br/>

Of TALGOL with Promethean powder,<br/>

And now was searching for the shot<br/>

That laid MAGNANO on the spot,                                630<br/>

Beheld the sturdy Squire aforesaid<br/>

Preparing to climb up his horse side.<br/>

He left his cure, and laying hold<br/>

Upon his arms, with courage bold,<br/>

Cry'd out, 'Tis now no time to dally,                         635<br/>

The enemy begin to rally:<br/>

Let us, that are unhurt and whole,<br/>

Fall on, and happy man be's dole.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00200">This said, like to a thunderbolt,<br/>

He flew with fury to th' assault,                             640<br/>

Striving the enemy to attack<br/>

Before he reach'd his horse's back.<br/>

RALPHO was mounted now, and gotten<br/>

O'erthwart his beast with active vau'ting,<br/>

Wrigling his body to recover                                  645<br/>

His seat, and cast his right leg over,<br/>

When ORSIN, rushing in, bestow'd<br/>

On horse and man so heavy a load,<br/>

The beast was startled, and begun<br/>

To kick and fling like mad, and run,                          650<br/>

Bearing the tough Squire like a sack,<br/>

Or stout king RICHARD, on his back,<br/>

'Till stumbling, he threw him down,<br/>

Sore bruis'd, and cast into a swoon.<br/>

Meanwhile the Knight began to rouze                           655<br/>

The sparkles of his wonted prowess.<br/>

He thrust his hand into his hose,<br/>

And found, both by his eyes and nose,<br/>

'Twas only choler, and not blood,<br/>

That from his wounded body flow'd.                            660<br/>

This, with the hazard of the Squire,<br/>

Inflam'd him with despightful ire.<br/>

Courageously he fac'd about.<br/>

And drew his other pistol out,<br/>

And now had half way bent the cock,                           665<br/>

When CERDON gave so fierce a shock,<br/>

With sturdy truncheon, thwart his arm,<br/>

That down it fell, and did no harm;<br/>

Then stoutly pressing on with speed,<br/>

Assay'd to pull him off his steed.                            670<br/>

The Knight his sword had only left,<br/>

With which he CERDON'S head had cleft,<br/>

Or at the least cropt off a limb,<br/>

But ORSIN came, and rescu'd him.<br/>

He, with his lance, attack'd the Knight                       675<br/>

Upon his quarters opposite.<br/>

But as a barque, that in foul weather,<br/>

Toss'd by two adverse winds together,<br/>

Is bruis'd, and beaten to and fro,<br/>

And knows not which to turn him to;                           680<br/>

So far'd the Knight between two foes,<br/>

And knew not which of them t'oppose;<br/>

Till ORSIN, charging with his lance<br/>

At HUDIBRAS, by spightful chance,<br/>

Hit CERDON such a bang, as stunn'd                            685<br/>

And laid him flat upon the ground.<br/>

At this the Knight began to chear up,<br/>

And, raising up himself on stirrup,<br/>

Cry'd out, Victoria! Lie thou there,<br/>

And I shall straight dispatch another,                        690<br/>

To bear thee company in death:<br/>

But first I'll halt a while, and breath:<br/>

As well he might; for ORSIN, griev'd<br/>

At th' wound that CERDON had receiv'd,<br/>

Ran to relieve him with his lore,                             695<br/>

And cure the hurt he gave before.<br/>

Mean while the Knight had wheel'd about,<br/>

To breathe himself, and next find out<br/>

Th' advantage of the ground, where best<br/>

He might the ruffled foe infest.                              700<br/>

This b'ing resolv'd, he spurr'd his steed,<br/>

To run at ORSIN with full speed,<br/>

While he was busy in the care<br/>

Of CERDON'S wound, and unaware:<br/>

But he was quick, and had already                             705<br/>

Unto the part apply'd remedy:<br/>

And, seeing th' enemy prepar'd,<br/>

Drew up, and stood upon his guard.<br/>

Then, like a warrior right expert<br/>

And skilful in the martial art,                               710<br/>

The subtle Knight straight made a halt,<br/>

And judg'd it best to stay th' assault,<br/>

Until he had reliev'd the Squire,<br/>

And then in order to retire;<br/>

Or, as occasion should invite,                                715<br/>

With forces join'd renew the fight.<br/>

RALPHO, by this time disentranc'd,<br/>

Upon his bum himself advanc'd,<br/>

Though sorely bruis'd; his limbs all o'er<br/>

With ruthless bangs were stiff and sore.                      720<br/>

Right fain he would have got upon<br/>

His feet again, to get him gone;<br/>

When HUDIBRAS to aid him came:<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00201">Quoth he (and call'd him by his name,)<br/>

Courage! the day at length is ours;                           725<br/>

And we once more, as conquerors,<br/>

Have both the field and honour won:<br/>

The foe is profligate, and run.<br/>

I mean all such as can; for some<br/>

This hand hath sent to their long home;                       730<br/>

And some lie sprawling on the ground,<br/>

With many a gash and bloody wound.<br/>

CAESAR himself could never say<br/>

He got two victories in a day,<br/>

As I have done, that can say, Twice I                         735<br/>

In one day, Veni, Vidi, Vici.<br/>

The foe's so numerous, that we<br/>

Cannot so often vincere<br/>

As they perire, and yet enow<br/>

Be left to strike an after-blow;                              740<br/>

Then, lest they rally, and once more<br/>

Put us to fight the bus'ness o'er,<br/>

Get up, and mount thy steed: Dispatch,<br/>

And let us both their motions watch.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00202">Quoth RALPH, I should not, if I were                          745<br/>

In case for action, now be here:<br/>

Nor have I turn'd my back, or hang'd<br/>

An arse, for fear of being bang'd.<br/>

It was for you I got these harms,<br/>

Advent'ring to fetch off your arms.                           750<br/>

The blows and drubs I have receiv'd<br/>

Have bruis'd my body, and bereav'd<br/>

My limbs of strength. Unless you stoop,<br/>

And reach your hand to pull me up,<br/>

I shall lie here, and be a prey                               755<br/>

To those who now are run away.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00203">That thou shalt not, (quoth HUDIBRAS;)<br/>

We read, the ancients held it was<br/>

More honourable far, servare<br/>

Civem, than slay an adversary:                                760<br/>

The one we oft to-day have done,<br/>

The other shall dispatch anon:<br/>

And though th' art of a diff'rent Church<br/>

I will not leave thee in the lurch.<br/>

This said, he jogg'd his good steed nigher,                   765<br/>

And steer'd him gently toward the Squire;<br/>

Then bowing down his body, stretch'd<br/>

His hand out, and at RALPHO reach'd;<br/>

When TRULLA, whom he did not mind,<br/>

Charg'd him like lightening behind.                           770<br/>

She had been long in search about<br/>

MAGNANO'S wound, to find it out;<br/>

But could find none, nor where the shot,<br/>

That had so startled him, was got<br/>

But having found the worst was past,                          775<br/>

She fell to her own work at last,<br/>

The pillage of the prisoners,<br/>

Which in all feats of arms was hers;<br/>

And now to plunder RALPH she flew,<br/>

When HUDIBRAS his hard fate drew                              780<br/>

To succour him; for, as he bow'd<br/>

To help him up, she laid a load<br/>

Of blows so heavy, and plac'd so well,<br/>

On t'other side, that down he fell.<br/>

Yield, scoundrel base, (quoth she,) or die:                   785<br/>

Thy life is mine and liberty:<br/>

But if thou think'st I took thee tardy,<br/>

And dar'st presume to be so hardy,<br/>

To try thy fortune o'er a-fresh,<br/>

I'll wave my title to thy flesh,                              790<br/>

Thy arms and baggage, now my right;<br/>

And if thou hast the heart to try't,<br/>

I'll lend thee back thyself a while,<br/>

And once more, for that carcass vile,<br/>

Fight upon tick. — Quoth HUDIBRAS,                           795<br/>

Thou offer'st nobly, valiant lass,<br/>

And I shall take thee at thy word.<br/>

First let me rise and take my sword.<br/>

That sword which has so oft this day<br/>

Through squadrons of my foes made way,                        800<br/>

And some to other worlds dispatch'd,<br/>

Now with a feeble spinster match'd,<br/>

Will blush with blood ignoble stain'd,<br/>

By which no honour's to be gain'd.<br/>

But if thou'lt take m' advice in this,                        805<br/>

Consider whilst thou may'st, what 'tis<br/>

To interrupt a victor's course,<br/>

B' opposing such a trivial force:<br/>

For if with conquest I come off,<br/>

(And that I shall do sure enough,)                            810<br/>

Quarter thou canst not have, nor grace,<br/>

By law of arms, in such a case;<br/>

Both which I now do offer freely.<br/>

I scorn (quoth she) thou coxcomb silly,<br/>

(Clapping her hand upon her breech,                           815<br/>

To shew how much she priz'd his speech,)<br/>

Quarter or counsel from a foe<br/>

If thou can'st force me to it, do.<br/>

But lest it should again be said,<br/>

When I have once more won thy head,                           820<br/>

I took thee napping, unprepar'd,<br/>

Arm, and betake thee to thy guard.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00204">This said, she to her tackle fell,<br/>

And on the Knight let fall a peal<br/>

Of blows so fierce, and press'd so home,                      825<br/>

That he retir'd, and follow'd's bum.<br/>

Stand to't (quoth she) or yield to mercy<br/>

It is not fighting arsie-versie<br/>

Shall serve thy turn. — This stirr'd his spleen<br/>

More than the danger he was in,                               830<br/>

The blows he felt, or was to feel,<br/>

Although th' already made him reel.<br/>

Honour, despight; revenge and shame,<br/>

At once into his stomach came,<br/>

Which fir'd it so, he rais'd his arm                          835<br/>

Above his head, and rain'd a storm<br/>

Of blows so terrible and thick,<br/>

As if he meant to hash her quick.<br/>

But she upon her truncheon took them,<br/>

And by oblique diversion broke them,                          840<br/>

Waiting an opportunity<br/>

To pay all back with usury;<br/>

Which long she fail'd not of; for now<br/>

The Knight with one dead-doing blow<br/>

Resolving to decide the fight,                                845<br/>

And she, with quick and cunning slight,<br/>

Avoiding it, the force and weight<br/>

He charged upon it was so great,<br/>

As almost sway'd him to the ground.<br/>

No sooner she th' advantage found,                            850<br/>

But in she flew; and seconding<br/>

With home-made thrust the heavy swing,<br/>

She laid him flat upon his side;<br/>

And mounting on his trunk a-stride,<br/>

Quoth she, I told thee what would come                        855<br/>

Of all thy vapouring, base scum.<br/>

Say, will the law of arms allow<br/>

I may have grace and quarter now?<br/>

Or wilt thou rather break thy word,<br/>

And stain thine honour than thy sword?                        860<br/>

A man of war to damn his soul,<br/>

In basely breaking his parole<br/>

And when, before the fight, th' had'st vow'd<br/>

To give no quarter in cold blood<br/>

Now thou hast got me for a Tartar,                            865<br/>

To make me 'gainst my will take quarter;<br/>

Why dost not put me to the sword,<br/>

But cowardly fly from thy word?<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00205">Quoth HUDIBRAS, The day's thine own:<br/>

Thou and thy Stars have cast me down:                         870<br/>

My laurels are transplanted now,<br/>

And flourish on thy conqu'ring brow:<br/>

My loss of honour's great enough,<br/>

Thou need'st not brand it with a scoff:<br/>

Sarcasms may eclipse thine own,                               875<br/>

But cannot blur my lost renown.<br/>

I am not now in Fortune's power;<br/>

He that is down can fall no lower.<br/>

The ancient heroes were illustrious<br/>

For being benign, and not blustrous,                          880<br/>

Against a vanquish'd foe: their swords<br/>

Were sharp and trenchant, not their words;<br/>

And did in fight but cut work out<br/>

To employ their courtesies about.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00206">Quoth she, Although thou hast deserv'd                        885<br/>

Base slubberdegullion, to be serv'd<br/>

As thou did'st vow to deal with me,<br/>

If thou had'st got the victory<br/>

Yet I shall rather act a part<br/>

That suits my fame than thy desert.                           890<br/>

Thy arms, thy liberty, beside<br/>

All that's on th' outside of thy hide,<br/>

Are mine by military law,<br/>

Of which I will not hate one straw:<br/>

The rest, thy life and limbs, once more,                      895<br/>

Though doubly forfeit, I restore,<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00207">Quoth HUDIBRAS, It is too late<br/>

For me to treat or stipulate<br/>

What thou command'st, I must obey:<br/>

Yet those whom I expugn'd to-day                              900<br/>

Of thine own party, I let go,<br/>

And gave them life and freedom too:<br/>

Both dogs and bear, upon their parole,<br/>

Whom I took pris'ners in this quarrel.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00208">Quoth TRULLA, Whether thou or they                            905<br/>

Let one another run away,<br/>

Concerns not me; but was't not thou<br/>

That gave CROWDERO quarter too?<br/>

CROWDERO, whom, in irons bound,<br/>

Thou basely threw'st into LOB'S Pound,                        910<br/>

Where still he lies, and with regret<br/>

His gen'rous bowels rage and fret.<br/>

But now thy carcass shall redeem,<br/>

And serve to be exchang'd for him.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00209">This said, the Knight did straight submit,                    915<br/>

And laid his weapons at her feet.<br/>

Next he disrob'd his gaberdine,<br/>

And with it did himself resign.<br/>

She took it, and forthwith divesting<br/>

The mantle that she wore, said jesting,                       920<br/>

Take that, and wear it for my sake<br/>

Then threw it o'er his sturdy back,<br/>

And as &lt;s&gt; the FRENCH, we conquer'd once,<br/>

Now give us laws for pantaloons,<br/>

The length of breeches, and the gathers,                      925<br/>

Port-cannons, perriwigs, and feathers;<br/>

Just so the proud insulting lass<br/>

Array'd and dighted HUDIBRAS.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00210">Mean while the other champions, yerst<br/>

In hurry of the fight disperst,                               930<br/>

Arriv'd, when TRULLA won the day,<br/>

To share in th' honour and the prey,<br/>

And out of HUDIBRAS his hide<br/>

With vengeance to be satisfy'd;<br/>

Which now they were about to pour                             935<br/>

Upon him in a wooden show'r;<br/>

But TRULLA thrust herself between,<br/>

And striding o'er his back agen,<br/>

She brandish'd o'er her head his sword,<br/>

And vow'd they should not break her word;                     940<br/>

Sh' had giv'n him quarter, and her blood<br/>

Or theirs should make that quarter good;<br/>

For she was bound by law of arms<br/>

To see him safe from further harms.<br/>

In dungeon deep CROWDERO, cast                                945<br/>

By HUDIBRAS, as yet lay fast;<br/>

Where, to the hard and ruthless stones,<br/>

His great heart made perpetual moans:<br/>

Him she resolv'd that HUDIBRAS<br/>

Should ransom, and supply his place.                          950<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00211">This stopt their fury, and the basting<br/>

Which toward HUDIBRAS was hasting.<br/>

They thought it was but just and right,<br/>

That what she had atchiev'd in fight,<br/>

She should dispose of how she pleas'd.                        955<br/>

CROWDERO ought to be releas'd;<br/>

Nor could that any way be done<br/>

So well as this she pitch'd upon<br/>

For who a better could imagine<br/>

This therefore they resolv'd t'engage in.                     960<br/>

The Knight and Squire first they made<br/>

Rise from the ground, where they were laid<br/>

Then mounted both upon their horses,<br/>

But with their faces to the arses,<br/>

ORSIN led HUDIBRAS's beast,                                   965<br/>

And TALGOL that which RALPHO prest,<br/>

Whom stout MAGNANO, valiant CERDON,<br/>

And COLON, waited as a guard on;<br/>

All ush'ring TRULLA in the rear,<br/>

With th' arms of either prisoner.                             970<br/>

In this proud order and array<br/>

They put themselves upon their way,<br/>

Striving to reach th' enchanted castle,<br/>

Where stout CROWDERO in durance lay still.<br/>

Thither with greater speed than shows                         975<br/>

And triumph over conquer'd foes<br/>

Do use t' allow, or than the bears<br/>

Or pageants borne before Lord-Mayors<br/>

Are wont to use, they soon arriv'd<br/>

In order, soldier-like contriv'd;                             980<br/>

Still marching in a warlike posture,<br/>

As fit for battle as for muster.<br/>

The Knight and Squire they first unhorse,<br/>

And bending 'gainst the fort their force,<br/>

They all advanc'd, and round about                            985<br/>

Begirt the magical redoubt.<br/>

MAGNAN led up in this adventure,<br/>

And made way for the rest to enter;<br/>

For he was skilful in black art.<br/>

No less than he that built the fort;                          990<br/>

And with an iron mace laid flat<br/>

A breach, which straight all enter'd at,<br/>

And in the wooden dungeon found<br/>

CROWDERO laid upon the ground.<br/>

Him they release from durance base,                           995<br/>

Restor'd t' his fiddle and his case,<br/>

And liberty, his thirsty rage<br/>

With luscious vengeance to asswage:<br/>

For he no sooner was at large,<br/>

But TRULLA straight brought on the charge,                   1000<br/>

And in the self-same limbo put<br/>

The Knight and Squire where he was shut;<br/>

Where leaving them in Hockley i' th' Hole,<br/>

Their bangs and durance to condole,<br/>

Confin'd and conjur'd into narrow                            1005<br/>

Enchanted mansion to know sorrow,<br/>

In the same order and array<br/>

Which they advanc'd, they march'd away.<br/>

But HUDIBRAS who scorn'd to stoop<br/>

To Fortune, or be said to droop,                             1010<br/>

Chear'd up himself with ends of verse,<br/>

And sayings of philosophers.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00212">Quoth he, Th' one half of man, his mind,<br/>

Is, sui juris, unconfin'd,<br/>

And cannot be laid by the heels,                             1015<br/>

Whate'er the other moiety feels.<br/>

'Tis not restraint or liberty<br/>

That makes men prisoners or free;<br/>

But perturbations that possess<br/>

The mind, or aequanimities.                                  1020<br/>

The whole world was not half so wide<br/>

To ALEXANDER, when he cry'd,<br/>

Because he had but one to subdue,<br/>

As was a paltry narrow tub to<br/>

DIOGENES; who is not said                                    1025<br/>

(For aught that ever I could read)<br/>

To whine, put finger i' th' eye, and sob,<br/>

Because h' had ne'er another tub.<br/>

The ancients make two sev'ral kinds<br/>

Of prowess in heroic minds;                                  1030<br/>

The active, and the passive valiant;<br/>

Both which are pari libra gallant:<br/>

For both to give blows, and to carry,<br/>

In fights are equinecessary<br/>

But in defeats, the passive stout                            1035<br/>

Are always found to stand it out<br/>

Most desp'rately, and to out-do<br/>

The active 'gainst the conqu'ring foe.<br/>

Tho' we with blacks and blues are suggill'd,<br/>

Or, as the vulgar say, are cudgell'd;                        1040<br/>

He that is valiant, and dares fight,<br/>

Though drubb'd, can lose no honour by't.<br/>

Honour's a lease for lives to come,<br/>

And cannot be extended from<br/>

The legal tenant: 'tis a chattel                             1045<br/>

Not to be forfeited in battel.<br/>

If he that in the field is slain,<br/>

Be in the bed of Honour lain,<br/>

He that is beaten, may be said<br/>

To lie in Honour's truckle-bed.                              1050<br/>

For as we see th' eclipsed sun<br/>

By mortals is more gaz'd upon,<br/>

Than when, adorn'd with all his light,<br/>

He shines in serene sky most bright:<br/>

So valour, in a low estate,                                  1055<br/>

Is most admir'd and wonder'd at.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00213">Quoth RALPH, How great I do not know<br/>

We may by being beaten grow;<br/>

But none, that see how here we sit,<br/>

Will judge us overgrown with wit.                            1060<br/>

As gifted brethren, preaching by<br/>

A carnal hour-glass, do imply,<br/>

Illumination can convey<br/>

Into them what they have to say,<br/>

But not how much; so well enough                             1065<br/>

Know you to charge, but not draw off:<br/>

For who, without a cap and bauble,<br/>

Having subdu'd a bear and rabble,<br/>

And might with honour have come off<br/>

Would put it to a second proof?                              1070<br/>

A politic exploit, right fit<br/>

For Presbyterian zeal and wit.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00214">Quoth HUDIBRAS, That cuckow's tone,<br/>

RALPHO, thou always harp'st upon.<br/>

When thou at any thing would'st rail,                        1075<br/>

Thou mak'st Presbytery the scale<br/>

To take the height on't, and explain<br/>

To what degree it is prophane<br/>

Whats'ever will not with (thy what d'ye call)<br/>

Thy light jump right, thou call'st synodical;                1080<br/>

As if Presbytery were the standard<br/>

To size whats'ever's to he slander'd.<br/>

Dost not remember how this day,<br/>

Thou to my beard wast bold to say,<br/>

That thou coud'st prove bear-baiting equal                   1085<br/>

With synods orthodox and legal?<br/>

Do if thou canst; for I deny't,<br/>

And dare thee to 't with all thy light.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00215">Quoth RALPHO, Truly that is no<br/>

Hard matter for a man to do,                                 1090<br/>

That has but any guts in 's brains,<br/>

And cou'd believe it worth his pains;<br/>

But since you dare and urge me to it,<br/>

You'll find I've light enough to do it.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00216">Synods are mystical bear-gardens,                            1095<br/>

Where elders, deputies, church-wardens,<br/>

And other members of the court,<br/>

Manage the Babylonish sport;<br/>

For prolocutor, scribe, and bear-ward,<br/>

Do differ only in a mere word;                               1100<br/>

Both are but sev'ral synagogues<br/>

Of carnal men, and bears, and dogs:<br/>

Both antichristian assemblies,<br/>

To mischief bent far as in them lies:<br/>

Both stave and tail with fierce contests;                    1105<br/>

The one with men, the other beasts.<br/>

The diff'rence is, the one fights with<br/>

The tongue, the other with the teeth;<br/>

And that they bait but bears in this,<br/>

In th' other, souls and consciences;                         1110<br/>

Where Saints themselves are brought to stake<br/>

For gospel-light, and conscience sake;<br/>

Expos'd to Scribes and Presbyters,<br/>

Instead of mastive dogs and curs,<br/>

Than whom th' have less humanity;                            1115<br/>

For these at souls of men will fly.<br/>

This to the prophet did appear,<br/>

Who in a vision saw a bear,<br/>

Prefiguring the beastly rage<br/>

Of Church-rule in this latter age;                           1120<br/>

As is demonstrated at full<br/>

By him that baited the &lt;t&gt; Pope's Bull.<br/>

Bears nat'rally are beasts of prey,<br/>

That live by rapine; so do they.<br/>

What are their orders, constitutions,                        1125<br/>

Church-censures, curses, absolutions,<br/>

But' sev'ral mystic chains they make,<br/>

To tie poor Christians to the stake,<br/>

And then set heathen officers,<br/>

Instead of dogs, about their ears?                           1130<br/>

For to prohibit and dispense;<br/>

To find out or to make offence;<br/>

Of Hell and Heaven to dispose;<br/>

To play with souls at fast and loose;<br/>

To set what characters they please,                          1135<br/>

And mulcts on sin or godliness;<br/>

Reduce the Church to gospel-order,<br/>

By rapine, sacrilege, and murder;<br/>

To make Presbytery supreme,<br/>

And Kings themselves submit to them;                         1140<br/>

And force all people, though against<br/>

Their consciences, to turn Saints;<br/>

Must prove a pretty thriving trade,<br/>

When Saints monopolists are made;<br/>

When pious frauds, and holy shifts,                          1145<br/>

Are dispensations and gifts,<br/>

Their godliness becomes mere ware,<br/>

And ev'ry Synod but a fair.<br/>

Synods are whelps of th' Inquisition,<br/>

A mungrel breed of like pernicion,                           1150<br/>

And growing up, became the sires<br/>

Of scribes, commissioners, and triers;<br/>

Whose bus'ness is, by cunning slight,<br/>

To cast a figure for mens' light;<br/>

To find, in lines of beard and face,                         1155<br/>

The physiognomy of grace;<br/>

And by the sound and twang of nose,<br/>

If all be sound within disclose,<br/>

Free from a crack or flaw of sinning,<br/>

As men try pipkins by the ringing;                           1160<br/>

By black caps underlaid with white,<br/>

Give certain guess at inward light.<br/>

Which serjeants at the gospel wear,<br/>

To make the spiritual calling clear;<br/>

The handkerchief about the neck                              1165<br/>

(Canonical cravat of &lt;u&gt; SMECK,<br/>

From whom the institution came,<br/>

When Church and State they set on flame,<br/>

And worn by them as badges then<br/>

Of spiritual warfaring men)                                  1170<br/>

Judge rightly if regeneration<br/>

Be of the newest cut in fashion.<br/>

Sure 'tis an orthodox opinion,<br/>

That grace is founded in dominion.<br/>

Great piety consists in pride;                               1175<br/>

To rule is to be sanctified:<br/>

To domineer, and to controul,<br/>

Both o'er the body and the soul,<br/>

Is the most perfect discipline<br/>

Of church-rule, and by right-divine.                         1180<br/>

Bell and the Dragon's chaplains were<br/>

More moderate than these by far:<br/>

For they (poor knaves) were glad to cheat,<br/>

To get their wives and children meat;<br/>

But these will not be fobb'd off so;                         1185<br/>

They must have wealth and power too,<br/>

Or else with blood and desolation<br/>

They'll tear it out o' th' heart o' th' nation.<br/>

Sure these themselves from primitive<br/>

And Heathen Priesthood do derive,                            1190<br/>

When butchers were the only Clerks,<br/>

Elders and Presbyters of Kirks;<br/>

Whose directory was to kill;<br/>

And some believe it is so still.<br/>

The only diff'rence is, that then                            1195<br/>

They slaughter'd only beasts, now men.<br/>

For then to sacrifice a bullock,<br/>

Or now and then a child to Moloch,<br/>

They count a vile abomination,<br/>

But not to slaughter a whole nation.                         1200<br/>

Presbytery does but translate<br/>

The Papacy to a free state;<br/>

A commonwealth of Popery,<br/>

Where ev'ry village is a See<br/>

As well as Rome, and must maintain                           1205<br/>

A Tithe-pig Metropolitan;<br/>

Where ev'ry Presbyter and Deacon<br/>

Commands the keys for cheese and bacon;<br/>

And ev'ry hamlet's governed<br/>

By's Holiness, the Church's Head;                            1210<br/>

More haughty and severe in's place,<br/>

Than GREGORY or BONIFACE.<br/>

Such Church must (surely) be a monster<br/>

With many heads: for if we conster<br/>

What in th' Apocalypse we find,                              1215<br/>

According to th' Apostle's mind,<br/>

'Tis that the Whore of Babylon<br/>

With many heads did ride upon;<br/>

Which heads denote the sinful tribe<br/>

Of Deacon, Priest, Lay-Elder, Scribe.                        1220<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00217">Lay-Elder, SIMEON to LEVI,<br/>

Whose little finger is as heavy<br/>

As loins of patriarchs, prince-prelate,<br/>

And bishop-secular. This zealot<br/>

Is of a mungrel, diverse kind;                               1225<br/>

Cleric before, and lay behind;<br/>

A lawless linsie-woolsie brother,<br/>

Half of one order, half another;<br/>

A creature of amphibious nature;<br/>

On land a beast, a fish in water;                            1230<br/>

That always preys on grace or sin;<br/>

A sheep without, a wolf within.<br/>

This fierce inquisitor has chief<br/>

Dominion over men's belief<br/>

And manners: can pronounce a Saint                           1235<br/>

Idolatrous or ignorant,<br/>

When superciliously he sifts<br/>

Through coarsest boulter others' gifts;<br/>

For all men live and judge amiss,<br/>

Whose talents jump not just with his.                        1240<br/>

He'll lay on gifts with hands, and place<br/>

On dullest noddle Light and Grace,<br/>

The manufacture of the Kirk.<br/>

Those pastors are but th' handy-work<br/>

Of his mechanic paws, instilling                             1245<br/>

Divinity in them by feeling;<br/>

From whence they start up Chosen Vessels,<br/>

Made by contact, as men get meazles.<br/>

&lt;x&gt; So Cardinals, they say, do grope<br/>

At th' other end the new-made Pope.                          1250<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00218">Hold, hold, quoth HUDIBRAS; soft fire,<br/>

They say, does make sweet malt. Good Squire,<br/>

Festina lente, not too fast;<br/>

For haste (the proverb says) makes waste.<br/>

The quirks and cavils thou dost make                         1255<br/>

Are false, and built upon mistake:<br/>

And I shall bring you, with your pack<br/>

Of fallacies, t' elenchi back;<br/>

And put your arguments in mood<br/>

And figure to be understood.                                 1260<br/>

I'll force you, by right ratiocination,<br/>

To leave your &lt;y&gt; vitilitigation,<br/>

And make you keep to th' question close,<br/>

And argue dialecticos.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00219">The question then, to state it first,                        1265<br/>

Is, Which is better, or which worst,<br/>

Synods or Bears? Bears I avow<br/>

To be the worst, and Synods thou.<br/>

But, to make good th' assertion,<br/>

Thou say'st th' are really all one.                          1270<br/>

If so, not worst; for if th' are idem<br/>

Why then, tantundem dat tantidem.<br/>

For if they are the same, by course,<br/>

Neither is better, neither worse.<br/>

But I deny they are the same,                                1275<br/>

More than a maggot and I am.<br/>

That both are animalia<br/>

I grant, but not rationalia:<br/>

For though they do agree in kind,<br/>

Specific difference we find;                                 1280<br/>

And can no more make bears of these,<br/>

Than prove my horse is SOCRATES.<br/>

That Synods are bear-gardens too,<br/>

Thou dost affirm; but I say no:<br/>

And thus I prove it in a word;                               1285<br/>

Whats'ver assembly's not impow'r'd<br/>

To censure, curse, absolve, and ordain,<br/>

Can be no Synod: but bear-garden<br/>

Has no such pow'r; ergo, 'tis none:<br/>

And so thy sophistry's o'erthrown.                           1290<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00220">But yet we are beside the question<br/>

Which thou didst raise the first contest on;<br/>

For that was, Whether Bears are better<br/>

Than Synod-men? I say, Negatur.<br/>

That bears are beasts, and synods men,                       1295<br/>

Is held by all: they're better then:<br/>

For bears and dogs on four legs go,<br/>

As beasts, but Synod-men on two.<br/>

'Tis true, they all have teeth and nails;<br/>

But prove that Synod-men have tails;                         1300<br/>

Or that a rugged, shaggy fur<br/>

Grows o'er the hide of Presbyter;<br/>

Or that his snout and spacious ears<br/>

Do hold proportion with a bear's.<br/>

A bears a savage beast, of all                               1305<br/>

Most ugly and unnatural<br/>

Whelp'd without form, until the dam<br/>

Has lick'd it into shape and frame:<br/>

But all thy light can ne'er evict,<br/>

That ever Synod-man was lick'd;                              1310<br/>

Or brought to any other fashion,<br/>

Than his own will and inclination.<br/>

But thou dost further yet in this<br/>

Oppugn thyself and sense; that is,<br/>

Thou would'st have Presbyters to go                          1315<br/>

For bears and dogs, and bearwards too;<br/>

A strange chimera of beasts and men,<br/>

Made up of pieces heterogene;<br/>

Such as in nature never met<br/>

In eodem subjecto yet.                                       1320<br/>

Thy other arguments are all<br/>

Supposures, hypothetical,<br/>

That do but beg, and we may chose<br/>

Either to grant them, or refuse.<br/>

Much thou hast said, which I know when                       1325<br/>

And where thou stol'st from other men,<br/>

Whereby 'tis plain thy Light and Gifts<br/>

Are all but plagiary shifts;<br/>

And is the same that Ranter said,<br/>

Who, arguing with me, broke my head,                         1330<br/>

And tore a handful of my beard:<br/>

The self-same cavils then I heard,<br/>

When, b'ing in hot dispute about<br/>

This controversy, we fell out<br/>

And what thou know'st I answer'd then,                       1335<br/>

Will serve to answer thee agen.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00221">Quoth RALPHO, Nothing but th' abuse<br/>

Of human learning you produce;<br/>

Learning, that cobweb of the brain,<br/>

Profane, erroneous, and vain;                                1340<br/>

A trade of knowledge, as replete<br/>

As others are with fraud and cheat;<br/>

An art t'incumber gifts and wit,<br/>

And render both for nothing fit;<br/>

Makes Light unactive, dull, and troubled,                    1345<br/>

Like little DAVID in SAUL's doublet;<br/>

A cheat that scholars put upon<br/>

Other mens' reason and their own;<br/>

A fort of error, to ensconce<br/>

Absurdity and ignorance,                                     1350<br/>

That renders all the avenues<br/>

To truth impervious and abstruse,<br/>

By making plain things, in debate,<br/>

By art, perplex'd, and intricate<br/>

For nothing goes for sense or light                          1355<br/>

That will not with old rules jump right:<br/>

As if rules were not in the schools<br/>

Deriv'd from truth, but truth from rules.<br/>

This pagan, heathenish invention<br/>

Is good for nothing but contention.                          1360<br/>

For as, in sword-and-buckler fight,<br/>

All blows do on the target light;<br/>

So when men argue, the great'st part<br/>

O' th' contests falls on terms of art,<br/>

Until the fustian stuff be spent,                            1365<br/>

And then they fall to th' argument.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00222">Quoth HUDIBRAS Friend RALPH, thou hast<br/>

Out-run the constable at last:<br/>

For thou art fallen on a new<br/>

Dispute, as senseless as untrue,                             1370<br/>

But to the former opposite<br/>

And contrary as black to white;<br/>

Mere &lt;z&gt; disparata; that concerning<br/>

Presbytery; this, human learning;<br/>

Two things s'averse, they never yet                          1375<br/>

But in thy rambling fancy met.<br/>

But I shall take a fit occasion<br/>

T' evince thee by ratiocination,<br/>

Some other time, in place more proper<br/>

Than this we're in; therefore let's stop here,               1380<br/>

And rest our weary'd bones a-while,<br/>

Already tir'd with other toil.<br/>
</p>

<h3 id="id00223" style="margin-top: 3em">NOTES TO PART I. CANTO III.</h3>

<p id="id00224" style="margin-top: 2em">134 p First TRULLA stav'd, &amp;c.] Staving and Tailing are terms
of art used in the Bear-Garden, and signify there only the
parting of dogs and bears: Though they are used metaphorically
in several other professions, for moderating; as law, divinity,
hectoring, &amp;c.</p>

<p id="id00225">153 q Or like the late corrected leathern
      Ears of the Circumcised Brethren.
Pryn, Bastwick, and Burton, who laid down their ears as proxies
for their profession of the godly party, not long after maintained
their right and title to the pillory to be as good and lawful as
theirs who first of all took possession of it in their names.</p>

<p id="id00226">328 r That old, &amp;c.] Pygmalion, king of Tyre, was the son of
Margenus, or Mechres, whom he succeeded, and lived 56 years,
wherof he reigned 47. Dido, his sister, was to have governed
with him, but it was pretended the subjects thought it not
convenient. She married Sichaeus, who was the king's uncle,
and very rich; wherefore he put him to death; and Dido soon
after departed the kingdom. Poets say, Pygmalion was punished
for the hatred he bore to women with the love he had to a statue.</p>

<p id="id00227">925 s And as the FRENCH we conquer'd once,
      Now give us Laws for PANTALOONS, &amp;c.
Pantaloons and Port-Cannons were some of the fantastick
fashions wherein we aped the French.</p>

<p id="id00228">At quisquis Insula satus Britannica<br/>

Sic patria insolens fastidiet suam,<br/>

Ut more simiae laboret fingere,<br/>

Et aemulari Gallicas ineptias,<br/>

Et omni Gallo ego hunc opinor ebrium;<br/>

Ergo ex Britanno, ut Gallus esse nititur,<br/>

Sic Dii jubete, fiat ex Galle Capus.<br/>
</p>

<h5 id="id00229">THOMAS MORE.</h5>

<p id="id00230">Gallus is a river in Phrygia; rising out of the mountains of
Celenae, and discharging itself into the river Sanger, the water
of which is of that admirable quality, that, being moderately
drank, it purges the brain, and cures madness; but largely drank,
it makes men frantick. Pliny, Horatius.</p>

<p id="id00231">1123 t A learned divine in King James's time wrote a polemick
work against the Pope, and gave it that unlucky nick-name of
The Pope's Bull baited.</p>

<p id="id00232">1166 u Canonical Cravat, &amp;c.] Smectymnuus was a club of five
parlimentary holders-forth; the characters of whose names and
talents were by themselves expressed in that senseless and
insignificant word. They wore handkerchiefs about their necks
for a mark of distinction (as the Officers of the Parliament
Army then did) which afterwards degenerated into carnal
cravats. About the beginning of the long Parliament, in the year
1641, these five wrote a book against Episcopacy and the
Common Prayer, to which they all subscribed their names;
being Stephen Marshal, Edmund Calamy, Thomas Young,
Matthew Newcomen, and William Spurstow, and from thence
they and their followers were called Smectymnians. They are
remarkable for another pious book, which they wrote some time
after that, intitled, The Kings Cabinet unlocked, wherein all the
chaste and endearing expressions, in the letters that passed
betwixt his Majesty King Charles I. and his Royal Consort are
by these painful labourers in the Devil's vineyard turned into
burlesque and ridicule. Their books were answered with as
much calmness and genteelness of expression, and as much
learning and honesty, b. the Rev. Mr. Symonds, then a deprived
clergyman, as theirs was stuffed with malice, spleen, and
rascally invectives.</p>

<p id="id00233">1249 x So Cardinals they say do grope
       At t'other end the new-made Pope.
This relates to the story of Pope Joan, who was called John
VIII. Platina saith she was of English extraction, but born at
Mentz; who, having disguised herself like a man, travelled with
her paramour to Athens, where she made such progress in
learning, that coming to Rome, she met with few that could
equal her; so that, on the death of Pope Leo IV. she was chosen
to succeed him; but being got with child by one of her
domesticks, her travail came upon her between the Colossian
Theatre and St. Clement's, as she was going to the Lateran
Church, and died upon the place, having sat two years, one
month, and four days, and was buried there without any pomp.
He owns that, for the shame of this, the Popes decline going
through this street to the Lateran; and that, to avoid the like
error, when any Pope is placed in the Porphyry Chair, his
genitals are felt by the youngest deacon, through a hole made
for that purpose; but he supposes the reason of that to he, to put
him in mind that he is a man, and obnoxious to the necessities
of nature; whence he will have the seat to be called, Sedes
Stercoraria.</p>

<p id="id00234">1262  y To leave your Vitiligation, &amp;c.] Vitilitigation is a word
the Knight was passionately in love with, and never failed to
use it upon all occasions; and therefore to omit it, when it fell in
the way, bad argued too great a neglect of his learning and
parts; though it means no more than a perverse humour of
wrangling.</p>

<p id="id00235">1373 z Mere Disparata, &amp;c.] Disparata are things separate and
unlike, from the Latin word Disparo.</p>

<h3 id="id00236" style="margin-top: 3em">PART II</h3>

<h4 id="id00237" style="margin-top: 2em">CANTO I</h4>

<h4 id="id00238" style="margin-top: 2em">THE ARGUMENT.</h4>

<p id="id00239">————————————————————————-<br/>

The Knight by damnable Magician,<br/>

Being cast illegally in prison,<br/>

Love brings his Action on the Case.<br/>

And lays it upon Hudibras.<br/>

How he receives the Lady's Visit,<br/>

And cunningly solicits his Suite,<br/>

Which she defers; yet on Parole<br/>

Redeems him from th' inchanted Hole.<br/>

————————————————————————-<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00240" style="margin-top: 2em">But now, t'observe a romantic method,<br/>

Let bloody steel a while be sheathed,<br/>

And all those harsh and rugged sounds<br/>

Of bastinadoes, cuts, and wounds,<br/>

Exchang'd to Love's more gentle stile,                          5<br/>

To let our reader breathe a while;<br/>

In which, that we may be as brief as<br/>

Is possible, by way of preface,<br/>

Is't not enough to make one strange,<br/>

That some men's fancies should ne'er change,                   10<br/>

But make all people do and say<br/>

The same things still the self-same way<br/>

Some writers make all ladies purloin'd,<br/>

And knights pursuing like a whirlwind<br/>

Others make all their knights, in fits                         15<br/>

Of jealousy, to lose their wits;<br/>

Till drawing blood o'th' dames, like witches,<br/>

Th' are forthwith cur'd of their capriches.<br/>

Some always thrive in their amours<br/>

By pulling plaisters off their sores;                          20<br/>

As cripples do to get an alms,<br/>

Just so do they, and win their dames.<br/>

Some force whole regions, in despight<br/>

O' geography, to change their site;<br/>

Make former times shake hands with latter,                     25<br/>

And that which was before, come after.<br/>

But those that write in rhime, still make<br/>

The one verse for the other's sake;<br/>

For, one for sense, and one for rhime,<br/>

I think's sufficient at one time.                              30<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00241">But we forget in what sad plight<br/>

We whilom left the captiv'd Knight<br/>

And pensive Squire, both bruis'd in body,<br/>

And conjur'd into safe custody.<br/>

Tir'd with dispute and speaking Latin,                         35<br/>

As well as basting and bear-baiting,<br/>

And desperate of any course,<br/>

To free himself by wit or force,<br/>

His only solace was, that now<br/>

His dog-bolt fortune was so low,                               40<br/>

That either it must quickly end<br/>

Or turn about again, and mend;<br/>

In which he found th' event, no less<br/>

Than other times beside his guess.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00242">There is a tall long sided dame                                45<br/>

(But wond'rous light,) ycleped Fame<br/>

That, like a thin camelion, boards<br/>

Herself on air, and eats her words;<br/>

Upon her shoulders wings she wears<br/>

Like hanging-sleeves, lin'd through with ears,                 50<br/>

And eyes, and tongues, as poets list,<br/>

Made good by deep mythologist,<br/>

With these she through the welkin flies,<br/>

And sometimes carries truth, oft lies<br/>

With letters hung like eastern pigeons,                        55<br/>

And Mercuries of furthest regions;<br/>

Diurnals writ for regulation<br/>

Of lying, to inform the nation;<br/>

And by their public use to bring down<br/>

The rate of whetstones in the kingdom.                         60<br/>

About her neck a pacquet-male,<br/>

Fraught with advice, some fresh, some stale,<br/>

Of men that walk'd when they were dead,<br/>

And cows of monsters brought to bed;<br/>

Of hail-stones big as pullets eggs,                            65<br/>

And puppies whelp'd with twice two legs;<br/>

A blazing star seen in the west,<br/>

By six or seven men at least.<br/>

Two trumpets she does sound at once,<br/>

But both of clean contrary tones;                              70<br/>

But whether both with the same wind,<br/>

Or one before, and one behind,<br/>

We know not; only this can tell,<br/>

The one sounds vilely, th' other well;<br/>

And therefore vulgar authors name                              75<br/>

Th' one Good, the other Evil, Fame.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00243">This tattling gossip knew too well<br/>

What mischief HUDIBRAS befell.<br/>

And straight the spiteful tidings bears<br/>

Of all to th' unkind widow's ears.                             80<br/>

DEMOCRITUS ne'er laugh'd so loud<br/>

To see bawds carted through the crowd,<br/>

Or funerals with stately pomp<br/>

March slowly on in solemn dump,<br/>

As she laugh'd out, until her back,                            85<br/>

As well as sides, was like to crack.<br/>

She vow'd she would go see the sight,<br/>

And visit the distressed Knight;<br/>

To do the office of a neighbour,<br/>

And be a gossip at his labour;                                 90<br/>

And from his wooden jail, the stocks,<br/>

To set at large his fetter-locks;<br/>

And, by exchange, parole, or ransom,<br/>

To free him from th' enchanted mansion.<br/>

This b'ing resolv'd, she call'd for hood                       95<br/>

And usher, implements abroad<br/>

Which ladies wear, beside a slender<br/>

Young waiting damsel to attend her;<br/>

All which appearing, on she went,<br/>

To find the Knight in limbo pent.                             100<br/>

And 'twas not long before she found<br/>

Him, and the stout Squire, in the pound;<br/>

Both coupled in enchanted tether,<br/>

By further leg behind together<br/>

For as he sat upon his rump,                                  105<br/>

His head like one in doleful dump,<br/>

Between his knees, his hands apply'd<br/>

Unto his ears on either side;<br/>

And by him, in another hole,<br/>

Afflicted RALPHO, cheek by jowl;                              110<br/>

She came upon him in his wooden<br/>

Magician's circle on the sudden,<br/>

As spirits do t' a conjurer,<br/>

When in their dreadful shapes th' appear.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00244">No sooner did the Knight perceive her,                        115<br/>

But straight he fell into a fever,<br/>

Inflam'd all over with disgrace,<br/>

To be seen by her in such a place;<br/>

Which made him hang his head, and scoul,<br/>

And wink, and goggle like an owl.                             120<br/>

He felt his brains begin to swim,<br/>

When thus the dame accosted him:<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00245">This place (quoth she) they say's enchanted,<br/>

And with delinquent spirits haunted,<br/>

That here are ty'd in chains, and scourg'd,                   125<br/>

Until their guilty crimes be purg'd.<br/>

Look, there are two of them appear,<br/>

Like persons I have seen somewhere.<br/>

Some have mistaken blocks and posts<br/>

For spectres, apparitions, ghosts,                            130<br/>

With saucer eyes, and horns; and some<br/>

Have heard the Devil beat a drum:<br/>

But if our eyes are not false glasses,<br/>

That give a wrong account of faces,<br/>

That beard and I should be acquainted,                        135<br/>

Before 'twas conjur'd or enchanted;<br/>

For though it be disfigur'd somewhat,<br/>

As if 't had lately been in combat,<br/>

It did belong to a worthy Knight<br/>

Howe'er this goblin has come by't.                            140<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00246">When HUDIBRAS the Lady heard<br/>

Discoursing thus upon his beard,<br/>

And speak with such respect and honour,<br/>

Both of the beard and the beard's owner,<br/>

He thought it best to set as good                             145<br/>

A face upon it as he cou'd,<br/>

And thus he spoke: Lady, your bright<br/>

And radiant eyes are in the right:<br/>

The beard's th' identic beard you knew,<br/>

The same numerically true:                                    150<br/>

Nor is it worn by fiend or elf,<br/>

But its proprietor himself.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00247">O, heavens! quoth she, can that be true?<br/>

I do begin to fear 'tis you:<br/>

Not by your individual whiskers,                              155<br/>

But by your dialect and discourse,<br/>

That never spoke to man or beast<br/>

In notions vulgarly exprest.<br/>

But what malignant star, alas<br/>

Has brought you both to this sad pass?                        160<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00248">Quoth he, The fortune of the war,<br/>

Which I am less afflicted for,<br/>

Than to be seen with beard and face,<br/>

By you in such a homely case.<br/>

Quoth she, Those need not he asham'd                          165<br/>

For being honorably maim'd,<br/>

If he that is in battle conquer'd,<br/>

Have any title to his own beard;<br/>

Though yours be sorely lugg'd and torn,<br/>

It does your visage more adorn                                170<br/>

Than if 'twere prun'd, and starch'd, and lander'd,<br/>

And cut square by the Russian standard.<br/>

A torn beard's like a tatter'd ensign,<br/>

That's bravest which there are most rents in.<br/>

That petticoat about your shoulders                           175<br/>

Does not so well become a souldier's;<br/>

And I'm afraid they are worse handled<br/>

Although i' th' rear; your beard the van led;<br/>

And those uneasy bruises make<br/>

My heart for company to ake,                                  180<br/>

To see so worshipful a friend<br/>

I' th' pillory set, at the wrong end.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00249">Quoth HUDIBRAS, This thing call'd pain<br/>

Is (as the learned Stoicks maintain)<br/>

Not bad simpliciter, nor good,                                185<br/>

But merely as 'tis understood.<br/>

Sense is deceitful, and may feign,<br/>

As well in counterfeiting pain<br/>

As other gross phenomenas,<br/>

In which it oft mistakes the case.                            190<br/>

But since the immortal intellect<br/>

(That's free from error and defect,<br/>

Whose objects still persist the same)<br/>

Is free from outward bruise and maim,<br/>

Which nought external can expose                              195<br/>

To gross material bangs or blows,<br/>

It follows, we can ne'er be sure,<br/>

Whether we pain or not endure;<br/>

And just so far are sore and griev'd,<br/>

As by the fancy is believ'd.                                  200<br/>

Some have been wounded with conceit,<br/>

And dy'd of mere opinion straight;<br/>

Others, tho' wounded sore in reason,<br/>

Felt no contusion, nor discretion.<br/>

A Saxon  Duke did grow so fat,                                205<br/>

That mice (as histories relate)<br/>

Eat grots and labyrinths to dwell in<br/>

His postick parts without his feeling:<br/>

Then how is't possible a kick<br/>

Should e'er reach that way to the quick?                      210<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00250">Quoth she, I grant it is in vain.<br/>

For one that's basted to feel pain,<br/>

Because the pangs his bones endure<br/>

Contribute nothing to the cure:<br/>

Yet honor hurt, is wont to rage                               215<br/>

With pain no med'cine can asswage.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00251">Quoth he, That honour's very squeamish<br/>

That takes a basting for a blemish;<br/>

For what's more hon'rable than scars,<br/>

Or skin to tatters rent in wars?                              220<br/>

Some have been beaten till they know<br/>

What wood a cudgel's of by th' blow;<br/>

Some kick'd until they can feel whether<br/>

A shoe be Spanish or neat's leather;<br/>

And yet have met, after long running,                         225<br/>

With some whom they have taught that cunning.<br/>

The furthest way about t' o'ercome,<br/>

In the end does prove the nearest home.<br/>

By laws of learned duellists,<br/>

They that are bruis'd with wood or fists,                     230<br/>

And think one beating may for once<br/>

Suffice, are cowards and pultroons:<br/>

But if they dare engage t' a second,<br/>

They're stout and gallant fellows reckon'd.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00252">Th' old Romans freedom did bestow,                            235<br/>

Our princes worship, with a blow.<br/>

King PYRRHUS cur'd his  splenetic<br/>

And testy courtiers with a kick.<br/>

The NEGUS, when some mighty lord<br/>

Or potentate's to be restor'd                                 240<br/>

And pardon'd for some great offence,<br/>

With which be's willing to dispense,<br/>

First has him laid upon his belly,<br/>

Then beaten back and side to a jelly;<br/>

That done, he rises, humbly bows,                             245<br/>

And gives thanks for the princely blows;<br/>

Departs not meanly proud, and boasting<br/>

Of this magnificent rib-roasting.<br/>

The beaten soldier proves most manful,<br/>

That, like his sword, endures the anvil,                      250<br/>

And justly's held more formidable,<br/>

The more his valour's malleable:<br/>

But he that fears a bastinado<br/>

Will run away from his own shadow:<br/>

And though I'm now in durance fast,                           255<br/>

By our own party basely cast,<br/>

Ransom, exchange, parole refus'd,<br/>

And worse than by the enemy us'd;<br/>

In close catasta shut, past hope<br/>

Of wit or valour to elope;                                    260<br/>

As beards the nearer that they tend<br/>

To th' earth still grow more reverend;<br/>

And cannons shoot the higher pitches,<br/>

The lower we let down their breeches;<br/>

I'll make this low dejected fate                              265<br/>

Advance me to a greater height.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00253">Quoth she, Y' have almost made me in love<br/>

With that which did my pity move.<br/>

Great wits and valours, like great states,<br/>

Do sometimes sink with their own weights:<br/>

Th' extremes of glory and of shame,                           270<br/>

Like East and West, become the same:<br/>

No Indian Prince has to his palace<br/>

More foll'wers than a thief to th' gallows,<br/>

But if a beating seem so brave,                               275<br/>

What glories must a whipping have<br/>

Such great atchievements cannot fail<br/>

To cast salt on a woman's tail:<br/>

For if I thought your nat'ral talent<br/>

Of passive courage were so gallant,                           280<br/>

As you strain hard to have it thought,<br/>

I could grow amorous, and dote.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00254">When HUDIBRAS this language heard,<br/>

He prick'd up's ears and strok'd his beard;<br/>

Thought he, this is the lucky hour;                           285<br/>

Wines work when vines are in the flow'r;<br/>

This crisis then I'll set my rest on,<br/>

And put her boldly to the question.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00255">Madam, what you wou'd seem to doubt,<br/>

Shall be to all the world made out,                           290<br/>

How I've been drubb'd, and with what spirit<br/>

And magnanimity I bear it;<br/>

And if you doubt it to be true,<br/>

I'll stake myself down against you:<br/>

And if I fail in love or troth,                               295<br/>

Be you the winner, and take both.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00256">Quoth she, I've beard old cunning stagers<br/>

Say, fools for arguments use wagers;<br/>

And though I prais'd your valour, yet<br/>

I did not mean to baulk your wit;                             300<br/>

Which, if you have, you must needs know<br/>

What I have told you before now,<br/>

And you b' experiment have prov'd,<br/>

I cannot love where I'm belov'd.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00257">Quoth HUDIBRAS, 'tis a caprich                                305<br/>

Beyond th' infliction of a witch;<br/>

So cheats to play with those still aim<br/>

That do not understand the game.<br/>

Love in your heart as icily burns<br/>

As fire in antique Roman urns,                                310<br/>

To warm the dead, and vainly light<br/>

Those only that see nothing by't.<br/>

Have you not power to entertain,<br/>

And render love for love again;<br/>

As no man can draw in his breath                              315<br/>

At once, and force out air beneath?<br/>

Or do you love yourself so much,<br/>

To bear all rivals else a grutch?<br/>

What fate can lay a greater curse<br/>

Than you upon yourself would force?                           320<br/>

For wedlock without love, some say,<br/>

Is but a lock without a key.<br/>

It is a kind of rape to marry<br/>

One that neglects, or cares not for ye:<br/>

For what does make it ravishment,                             325<br/>

But b'ing against the mind's consent?<br/>

A rape that is the more inhuman<br/>

For being acted by a woman.<br/>

Why are you fair, but to entice us<br/>

To love you, that you may despise us?                         330<br/>

But though you cannot Love, you say,<br/>

Out of your own fanatick way,<br/>

Why should you not at least allow<br/>

Those that love you to do so too?<br/>

For, as you fly me, and pursue                                330<br/>

Love more averse, so I do you;<br/>

And am by your own doctrine taught<br/>

To practise what you call a fau't.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00258">Quoth she, If what you say is true,<br/>

You must fly me as I do you;                                  340<br/>

But 'tis not what we do, but say,<br/>

In love and preaching, that must sway.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00259">Quoth he, To bid me not to love,<br/>

Is to forbid my pulse to move,<br/>

My beard to grow, my ears to prick up,                        345<br/>

Or (when I'm in a fit) to hickup:<br/>

Command me to piss out the moon,<br/>

And 'twill as easily be done:<br/>

Love's power's too great to be withstood<br/>

By feeble human flesh and blood.                              350<br/>

'Twas he that brought upon his knees<br/>

The hect'ring, kill-cow HERCULES;<br/>

Transform'd his leager-lion's skin<br/>

T' a petticoat, and made him spin;<br/>

Seiz'd on his club, and made it dwindle                       355<br/>

T' a feeble distaff, and a spindle.<br/>

'Twas he that made emperors gallants<br/>

To their own sisters and their aunts;<br/>

Set popes and cardinals agog,<br/>

To play with pages at leap-frog.                              360<br/>

'Twas he that gave our Senate purges,<br/>

And flux'd the House of many a burgess;<br/>

Made those that represent the nation<br/>

Submit, and suffer amputation;<br/>

And all the Grandees o' the Cabal                             365<br/>

Adjourn to tubs at Spring and Fall.<br/>

He mounted Synod-Men, and rode 'em<br/>

To Dirty-Lane and Little Sodom;<br/>

Made 'em curvet like Spanish jenets,<br/>

And take the ring at Madam [Bennet's]                         370<br/>

'Twas he that made  Saint FRANCIS do<br/>

More than the Devil could tempt him to,<br/>

In cold and frosty weather, grow<br/>

Enamour'd of a wife of snow;<br/>

And though she were of rigid temper,                          375<br/>

With melting flames accost and tempt her;<br/>

Which after in enjoyment quenching,<br/>

He hung a garland on his engine<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00260">Quoth she, If Love have these effects,<br/>

Why is it not forbid our sex?                                 380<br/>

Why is't not damn'd and interdicted,<br/>

For diabolical and wicked?<br/>

And sung, as out of tune, against,<br/>

As Turk and Pope are by the Saints?<br/>

I find I've greater reason for it,                            385<br/>

Than I believ'd before t' abhor it.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00261">Quoth HUDIBRAS, These sad effects<br/>

Spring from your Heathenish neglects<br/>

Of Love's great pow'r, which he returns<br/>

Upon yourselves with equal scorns;                            390<br/>

And those who worthy lovers slight,<br/>

Plagues with prepost'rous appetite.<br/>

This made the beauteous Queen of Crete<br/>

To take a town-bull for her sweet,<br/>

And from her greatness stoop so low,                          395<br/>

To be the rival of a cow:<br/>

Others to prostitute their great hearts,<br/>

To he baboons' and monkeys' sweet-hearts;<br/>

Some with the Dev'l himself in league grow,<br/>

By's representative a Negro.                                  400<br/>

'Twas this made vestal-maids love-sick,<br/>

And venture to be bury'd quick:<br/>

Some by their fathers, and their brothers,<br/>

To be made mistresses and mothers.<br/>

'Tis this that proudest dames enamours                        405<br/>

On lacquies and valets des chambres;<br/>

Their haughty stomachs overcomes,<br/>

And makes 'em stoop to dirty grooms;<br/>

To slight the world, and to disparage<br/>

Claps, issue, infamy, and marriage.                           410<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00262">Quoth she, These judgments are severe,<br/>

Yet such as I should rather bear,<br/>

Than trust men with their oaths, or prove<br/>

Their faith and secresy in love,<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00263">Says he, There is as weighty reason                           415<br/>

For secresy in love as treason.<br/>

Love is a burglarer, a felon,<br/>

That at the windore-eyes does steal in<br/>

To rob the heart, and with his prey<br/>

Steals out again a closer way,                                420<br/>

Which whosoever can discover,<br/>

He's sure (as he deserves) to suffer.<br/>

Love is a fire, that burns and sparkles<br/>

In men as nat'rally as in charcoals,<br/>

Which sooty chymists stop in holes                            425<br/>

When out of wood they extract coals:<br/>

So lovers should their passions choak,<br/>

That, tho' they burn, they may not smoak.<br/>

'Tis like that sturdy thief that stole<br/>

And dragg'd beasts backwards into's hole:                     430<br/>

So Love does lovers, and us men<br/>

Draws by the tails into his den,<br/>

That no impression may discover,<br/>

And trace t' his cave, the wary lover,<br/>

But if you doubt I should reveal                              435<br/>

What you entrust me under seal.<br/>

I'll prove myself as close and virtuous<br/>

As your own secretary ALBERTUS.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00264">Quoth she, I grant you may be close<br/>

In hiding what your aims propose.                             440<br/>

Love-passions are like parables,<br/>

By which men still mean something else,<br/>

Though love be all the world's pretence,<br/>

Money's the mythologick sense;<br/>

The real substance of the shadow,                             445<br/>

Which all address and courtship's made to.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00265">Thought he, I understand your play,<br/>

And how to quit you your own way:<br/>

He that will win his dame, must do<br/>

As Love does when he bends his bow;                           450<br/>

With one hand thrust the lady from,<br/>

And with the other pull her home.<br/>

I grant, quoth he, wealth is a great<br/>

Provocative to am'rous heat.<br/>

It is all philters, and high diet,                            455<br/>

That makes love rampant, and to fly out:<br/>

'Tis beauty always in the flower,<br/>

That buds and blossoms at fourscore:<br/>

'Tis that by which the sun and moon<br/>

At their own weapons are out-done:                            460<br/>

That makes Knights-Errant fall in trances,<br/>

And lay about 'em in romances:<br/>

'Tis virtue, wit, and worth, and all<br/>

That men divine and sacred call:<br/>

For what is worth in any thing,                               465<br/>

But so much money as 'twill bring?<br/>

Or what, but riches is there known,<br/>

Which man can solely call his own<br/>

In which no creature goes his half;<br/>

Unless it be to  squint and laugh?                            470<br/>

I do confess, with goods and land,<br/>

I'd have a wife at second-hand;<br/>

And such you are. Nor is 't your person<br/>

My stomach's set so sharp and fierce on;<br/>

But 'tis (your better part) your riches,                      475<br/>

That my enamour'd heart bewitches.<br/>

Let me your fortune but possess,<br/>

And settle your person how you please:<br/>

Or make it o'er in trust to th' Devil;<br/>

You'll find me reasonable and civil.                          480<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00266">Quoth she, I like this plainness better<br/>

Than false mock-passion, speech, or letter,<br/>

Or any feat of qualm or sowning,<br/>

But hanging of yourself, or drowning.<br/>

Your only way with me to break                                485<br/>

Your mind, is breaking of your neck;<br/>

For as when merchants break, o'erthrown,<br/>

Like nine-pins they strike others down,<br/>

So that would break my heart; which done,<br/>

My tempting fortune is your own,                              490<br/>

These are but trifles: ev'ry lover<br/>

Will damn himself over and over,<br/>

And greater matters undertake<br/>

For a less worthy mistress' sake:<br/>

Yet th' are the only ways to prove                            495<br/>

Th' unfeign'd realities of love:<br/>

For he that hangs, or beats out's brains,<br/>

The Devil's in him if he feigns.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00267">Quoth HUDIBRAS, This way's too rough<br/>

For mere experiment and proof:                                500<br/>

It is no jesting, trivial matter,<br/>

To swing t' th' air, or douce in Water,<br/>

And, like a water-witch, try love;<br/>

That's to destroy, and not to prove;<br/>

As if a man should be dissected                               505<br/>

To find what part is disaffected.<br/>

Your better way is to make over,<br/>

In trust, your fortune to your lover.<br/>

Trust is a trial; if it break,<br/>

'Tis not so desp'rate as a neck.                              510<br/>

Beside, th' experiment's more certain;<br/>

Men venture necks to gain a fortune:<br/>

The soldier does it ev'ry day.<br/>

(Eight to the week) for sixpence pay:<br/>

Your pettifoggers damn their souls,                           515<br/>

To share with knaves in cheating fools:<br/>

And merchants, vent'ring through the main,<br/>

Slight pirates, rocks, and horns, for gain.<br/>

This is the way I advise you to:<br/>

Trust me, and see what I will do.                             520<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00268">Quoth she, I should be loth to run<br/>

Myself all th' hazard, and you none;<br/>

Which must be done, unless some deed<br/>

Of your's aforesaid do precede.<br/>

Give but yourself one gentle swing                            525<br/>

For trial, and I'll cut the string:<br/>

Or give that rev'rend head a maul,<br/>

Or two, or three, against a wall,<br/>

To shew you are a man of mettle,<br/>

And I'll engage myself to settle.                             530<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00269">Quoth he, My head's not made of brass,<br/>

As Friar BACON'S noodle was;<br/>

Nor (like the Indian's skull) so tough<br/>

That, authors say, 'twas musket-proof,<br/>

As yet on any new adventure,                                  535<br/>

As it had need to be, to enter.<br/>

You see what bangs it has endur'd,<br/>

That would, before new feats, be cur'd.<br/>

But if that's all you stand upon,<br/>

Here, strike me luck, it shall be done.                       540<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00270">Quoth she, The matter's not so far gone<br/>

As you suppose: Two words t' a bargain:<br/>

That may be done, and time enough,<br/>

When you have given downright proof;<br/>

And yet 'tis no fantastic pique                               545<br/>

I have to love, nor coy dislike:<br/>

'Tis no implicit, nice aversion<br/>

T' your conversation, mein, or person,<br/>

But a just fear, lest you should prove<br/>

False and perfidious in love:,                                550<br/>

For if I thought you could be true,<br/>

I could love twice as much as you.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00271">Quoth he, My faith as adamanatine,<br/>

As chains of destiny, I'll maintain:<br/>

True as APOLLO ever spoke,                                    555<br/>

Or Oracle from heart of oak;<br/>

And if you'll give my flame but vent,<br/>

Now in close hugger-mugger pent,<br/>

And shine upon me but benignly,<br/>

With that one, and that other pigsney,                        560<br/>

The sun and day shall sooner part,<br/>

Than love or you shake off my heart;<br/>

The sun, that shall no more dispense<br/>

His own but your bright influence.<br/>

I'll carve your name on barks of trees,                       565<br/>

With true-loves-knots and flourishes,<br/>

That shall infuse eternal spring,<br/>

And everlasting flourishing:<br/>

Drink ev'ry letter on't in stum,<br/>

And make it brisk champaign become;                           570<br/>

Where-e'er you tread, your foot shall set<br/>

The primrose and the violet:<br/>

All spices, perfumes, and sweet powders,<br/>

Shall borrow from your breath their odours:<br/>

Nature her charter shall renew,                               575<br/>

And take all lives of things from you;<br/>

The world depend upon your eye,<br/>

And when you frown upon it, die:<br/>

Only our loves shall still survive,<br/>

New worlds and natures to out-live:                           580<br/>

And, like to heralds' moons, remain<br/>

All crescents, without change or wane.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00272">Hold, hold, quoth she; no more of this,<br/>

Sir Knight; you take your aim amiss:<br/>

For you will find it a hard chapter                           585<br/>

To catch me with poetic rapture,<br/>

In which your mastery of art<br/>

Doth shew itself, and not your heart:<br/>

Nor will you raise in mine combustion<br/>

By dint of high heroic fustian.                               590<br/>

She that with poetry is won,<br/>

Is but a desk to write upon;<br/>

And what men say of her, they mean<br/>

No more than on the thing they lean.<br/>

Some with Arabian spices strive                               595<br/>

T' embalm her cruelly alive;<br/>

Or season her, as French cooks use<br/>

Their haut-gousts, bouillies, or ragousts:<br/>

Use her so barbarously ill,<br/>

To grind her lips upon a mill,                                600<br/>

Until the facet doublet doth<br/>

Fit their rhimes rather than her mouth:<br/>

Her mouth compar'd to an oyster's, with<br/>

A row of pearl in't — stead of teeth.<br/>

Others make posies of her cheeks,                             605<br/>

Where red and whitest colours mix;<br/>

In which the lily, and the rose,<br/>

For Indian lake and ceruse goes.<br/>

The sun and moon by her bright eyes<br/>

Eclips'd, and darken'd in the skies,                          610<br/>

Are but black patches, that she wears,<br/>

Cut into suns, and moons, and stars:<br/>

By which astrologers as well,<br/>

As those in Heav'n above, can tell<br/>

What strange events they do foreshow                          615<br/>

Unto her under-world below.<br/>

Her voice, the music of the spheres,<br/>

So loud, it deafens mortals ears;<br/>

As wise philosophers have thought;<br/>

And that's the cause we hear it not.                          620<br/>

This has been done by some, who those<br/>

Th' ador'd in rhime, would kick in prose;<br/>

And in those ribbons would have hung<br/>

On which melodiously they sung;<br/>

That have the hard fate to write best                         625<br/>

Of those still that deserve it least;<br/>

It matters not how false, or forc'd:<br/>

So the best things be said o' th' worst:<br/>

It goes for nothing when 'tis said;<br/>

Only the arrow's drawn to th' bead,                           630<br/>

Whether it be a swan or goose<br/>

They level at: So shepherds use<br/>

To set the same mark on the hip<br/>

Both of their sound and rotten sheep:<br/>

For wits, that carry low or wide,                             635<br/>

Must be aim'd higher, or beside<br/>

The mark, which else they ne'er come nigh,<br/>

But when they take their aim awry.<br/>

But I do wonder you should choose<br/>

This way t' attack me with your Muse,                         640<br/>

As one cut out to pass your tricks on,<br/>

With fulhams of poetic fiction:<br/>

I rather hop'd I should no more<br/>

Hear from you o' th' gallanting score:<br/>

For hard dry-bastings us'd to prove                           645<br/>

The readiest remedies of love;<br/>

Next a dry-diet: but if those fail,<br/>

Yet this uneasy loop-hol'd jail,<br/>

In which ye are hamper'd by the fetlock,<br/>

Cannot but put y' in mind of wedlock;                         650<br/>

Wedlock, that's worse than any hole here,<br/>

If that may serve you for a cooler,<br/>

T' allay your mettle, all agog<br/>

Upon a wife, the heavi'r clog:<br/>

Or rather thank your gentler fate,                            655<br/>

That for a bruis'd or broken pate,<br/>

Has freed you from those knobs that grow<br/>

Much harder on the marry'd brow:<br/>

But if no dread can cool your courage,<br/>

From vent'ring on that dragon, marriage,                      660<br/>

Yet give me quarter, and advance<br/>

To nobler aims your puissance:<br/>

Level at beauty and at wit;<br/>

The fairest mark is easiest hit.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00273">Quoth HUDIBRAS, I'm beforehand                                665<br/>

In that already, with your command<br/>

For where does beauty and high wit<br/>

But in your constellation meet?<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00274">Quoth she, What does a match imply,<br/>

But likeness and equality?                                    670<br/>

I know you cannot think me fit<br/>

To be th' yoke-fellow of your wit;<br/>

Nor take one of so mean deserts,<br/>

To be the partner of your parts;<br/>

A grace which, if I cou'd believe,                            675<br/>

I've not the conscience to receive.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00275">That conscience, quoth HUDIBRAS,<br/>

Is mis-inform'd: I'll state the case<br/>

A man may be a legal donor,<br/>

Of any thing whereof he's owner,                              680<br/>

And may confer it where he lists,<br/>

I' th' judgment of all casuists,<br/>

Then wit, and parts, and valour, may<br/>

Be ali'nated, and made away,<br/>

By those that are proprietors,                                685<br/>

As I may give or sell my horse.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00276">Quoth she, I grant the case is true<br/>

And proper 'twixt your horse and you;<br/>

But whether I may take as well<br/>

As you may give away or sell?                                 690<br/>

Buyers you know are bid beware;<br/>

And worse than thieves receivers are.<br/>

How shall I answer hue and cry,<br/>

For a roan gelding, twelve hands high,<br/>

All spurr'd and switch'd, a lock on's hoof,                   695<br/>

A sorrel mane? Can I bring proof<br/>

Where, when, by whom, and what y' were sold for,<br/>

And in the open market toll'd for?<br/>

Or should I take you for a stray,<br/>

You must be kept a year and day                               700<br/>

(Ere I can own you) here i' the pound,<br/>

Where, if y' are sought, you may be found<br/>

And in the mean time I must pay<br/>

For all your provender and hay.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00277">Quoth he, It stands me much upon                              705<br/>

T' enervate this objection,<br/>

And prove myself; by topic clear<br/>

No gelding, as you would infer.<br/>

Loss of virility's averr'd<br/>

To be the cause of loss of beard,                             710<br/>

That does (like embryo in the womb)<br/>

Abortive on the chin become.<br/>

This first a woman did invent,<br/>

In envy of man's ornament;<br/>

SEMIRAMIS, of Babylon,                                        715<br/>

Who first of all cut men o' th' stone,<br/>

To mar their beards, and lay foundation<br/>

Of sow-geldering operation.<br/>

Look on this beard, and tell me whether<br/>

Eunuchs wear such, or geldings either?                        720<br/>

Next it appears I am no horse;<br/>

That I can argue and discourse<br/>

Have but two legs, and ne'er a tail.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00278">Quoth she, That nothing will avail<br/>

For some philosophers of late here,                           725<br/>

Write, men have four legs by nature,<br/>

And that 'tis custom makes them go<br/>

Erron'ously upon but two;<br/>

As 'twas in Germany made good<br/>

B' a boy that lost himself in a wood,                         730<br/>

And growing down to a man, was wont<br/>

With wolves upon all four to hunt.<br/>

As for your reasons drawn from tails,<br/>

We cannot say they're true or false,<br/>

Till you explain yourself, and show,                          735<br/>

B' experiment, 'tis so or no.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00279">Quoth he, If you'll join issue on't,<br/>

I'll give you satisfactory account;<br/>

So you will promise, if you lose,<br/>

To settle all, and be my spouse.                              740<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00280">That never shall be done (quoth she)<br/>

To one that wants a tail, by me<br/>

For tails by nature sure were meant,<br/>

As well as beards, for ornament:<br/>

And though the vulgar count them homely,                      745<br/>

In men or beast they are so comely,<br/>

So gentee, alamode, and handsome,<br/>

I'll never marry man that wants one;<br/>

And till you can demonstrate plain,<br/>

You have one equal to your mane,                              750<br/>

I'll be torn piece-meal by a horse,<br/>

Ere I'll take you for better or worse.<br/>

The Prince of CAMBAY's daily food<br/>

Is asp, and basilisk, and toad;<br/>

Which makes him have so strong a breath,                      755<br/>

Each night he stinks a queen to death;<br/>

Yet I shall rather lie in's arms<br/>

Than yours, on any other terms.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00281">Quoth he, What nature can afford,<br/>

I shall produce, upon my word;                                760<br/>

And if she ever gave that boon<br/>

To man, I'll prove that I have one<br/>

I mean by postulate illation,<br/>

When you shall offer just occasion:<br/>

But since y' have yet deny'd to give                          765<br/>

My heart, your pris'ner, a reprieve,<br/>

But made it sink down to my heel,<br/>

Let that at least your pity feel;<br/>

And, for the sufferings of your martyr,<br/>

Give its poor entertainer quarter;                            770<br/>

And, by discharge or main-prize, grant<br/>

Deliv'ry from this base restraint.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00282">Quoth she, I grieve to see your leg<br/>

Stuck in a hole here like a peg;<br/>

And if I knew which way to do't                               775<br/>

(Your honour safe) I'd let you out.<br/>

That Dames by jail-delivery<br/>

Of Errant-Knights have been set free,<br/>

When by enchantment they have been,<br/>

And sometimes for it too, laid in,                            780<br/>

Is that which Knights are bound to do<br/>

By order, oath, and honour too:<br/>

For what are they renown'd, and famous else,<br/>

But aiding of distressed damosels?<br/>

But for a Lady no ways errant,                                785<br/>

To free a Knight, we have no warrant<br/>

In any authentical romance,<br/>

Or classic author, yet of France;<br/>

And I'd be loth to have you break<br/>

An ancient custom for a freak,                                790<br/>

Or innovation introduce<br/>

In place of things of antique use;<br/>

To free your heels by any course,<br/>

That might b' unwholesome to your spurs;<br/>

Which, if I should consent unto,                              795<br/>

It is not in my pow'r to do;<br/>

For 'tis a service must be done ye<br/>

With solemn previous ceremony;<br/>

Which always has been us'd t' untie<br/>

The charms of those who here do lie                           800<br/>

For as the ancients heretofore<br/>

To Honour's Temple had no door,<br/>

But that which thorough Virtue's lay,<br/>

So from this dungeon there's no way<br/>

To honour'd freedom, but by passing                           805<br/>

That other virtuous school of lashing,<br/>

Where Knights are kept in narrow lists,<br/>

With wooden lockets 'bout their wrists;<br/>

In which they for a while are tenants,<br/>

And for their Ladies suffer penance:                          810<br/>

Whipping, that's Virtue's governess,<br/>

Tutress of arts and sciences;<br/>

That mends the gross mistakes of Nature,<br/>

And puts new life into dull matter;<br/>

That lays foundation for renown,                              815<br/>

And all the honours of the gown.<br/>

This suffer'd, they are set at large,<br/>

And freed with hon'rable discharge.<br/>

Then in their robes the penitentials<br/>

Are straight presented with credentials,                      820<br/>

And in their way attended on<br/>

By magistrates of ev'ry town;<br/>

And, all respect and charges paid,<br/>

They're to their ancient seats convey'd.<br/>

Now if you'll venture, for my sake,                           825<br/>

To try the toughness of your back,<br/>

And suffer (as the rest have done)<br/>

The laying of a whipping on,<br/>

(And may you prosper in your suit,<br/>

As you with equal vigour do't,)                               830<br/>

I here engage myself to loose ye,<br/>

And free your heels from Caperdewsie.<br/>

But since our sex's modesty<br/>

Will not allow I should be by,<br/>

Bring me, on oath, a fair account,                            835<br/>

And honour too, when you have done't,<br/>

And I'll admit you to the place<br/>

You claim as due in my good grace.<br/>

If matrimony and hanging go<br/>

By dest'ny, why not whipping too?                             840<br/>

What med'cine else can cure the fits<br/>

Of lovers when they lose their wits?<br/>

Love is a boy by poets stil'd;<br/>

Then spare the rod and spoil the child.<br/>

A Persian emp'ror whipp'd his grannam                         845<br/>

The sea, his mother VENUS came on;<br/>

And hence some rev'rend men approve<br/>

Of rosemary in making love.<br/>

As skilful coopers hoop their tubs<br/>

With Lydian and with Phrygian dubs,                           850<br/>

Why may not whipping have as good<br/>

A grace, perform'd in time and mood,<br/>

With comely movement, and by art,<br/>

Raise passion in a lady's heart?<br/>

It is an easier way to make                                   855<br/>

Love by, than that which many take.<br/>

Who would not rather suffer whipping,<br/>

Than swallow toasts of bits of ribbon?<br/>

Make wicked verses, treats, and faces,<br/>

And spell names over with beer-glasses                        860<br/>

Be under vows to hang and die<br/>

Love's sacrifice, and all a lie?<br/>

With china-oranges and tarts<br/>

And whinning plays, lay baits for hearts?<br/>

Bribe chamber-maids with love and money,                      865<br/>

To break no roguish jests upon ye?<br/>

For lilies limn'd on cheeks, and roses,<br/>

With painted perfumes, hazard noses?<br/>

Or, vent'ring to be brisk and wanton,<br/>

Do penance in a paper lanthorn?                               870<br/>

All this you may compound for now,<br/>

By suffering what I offer you;<br/>

Which is no more than has been done<br/>

By Knights for Ladies long agone.<br/>

Did not the great LA MANCHA do so                             875<br/>

For the INFANTA DEL TOBOSO?<br/>

Did not th' illustrious Bassa make<br/>

Himself a slave for Misse's sake?<br/>

And with bull's pizzle, for her love,<br/>

Was taw 'd as gentle as a glove?                              880<br/>

Was not young FLORIO sent (to cool<br/>

His flame for BIANCAFIORE) to school,<br/>

Where pedant made his pathic bum<br/>

For her sake suffer martyrdom?<br/>

Did not a certain lady whip                                   885<br/>

Of late her husband's own Lordship?<br/>

And though a grandee of the House,<br/>

Claw'd him with fundamental blows<br/>

Ty'd him stark naked to a bed-post,<br/>

And firk'd his hide, as if sh' had rid post                   890<br/>

And after, in the sessions-court,<br/>

Where whipping's judg'd, had honour for't?<br/>

This swear you will perform, and then<br/>

I'll set you from th' inchanted den,<br/>

And the magician's circle clear.                              895<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00283">Quoth he, I do profess and swear,<br/>

And will perform what you enjoin,<br/>

Or may I never see you mine.<br/>

Amen, (quoth she;) then turn'd about,<br/>

And bid her Esquire let him out.                              900<br/>

But ere an artist could be found<br/>

T' undo the charms another bound,<br/>

The sun grew low, and left the skies,<br/>

Put down (some write) by ladies eyes,<br/>

The moon pull'd off her veil of light                         905<br/>

That hides her face by day from sight,<br/>

(Mysterious veil, of brightness made,<br/>

That's both her lustre and her shade,)<br/>

And in the lanthorn of the night<br/>

With shining horns hung out her light;                        910<br/>

For darkness is the proper sphere,<br/>

Where all false glories use t' appear.<br/>

The twinkling stars began to muster,<br/>

And glitter with their borrow'd lustre,<br/>

While sleep the weary 'd world reliev'd,                      915<br/>

By counterfeiting death reviv'd;<br/>

His whipping penance till the morn<br/>

Our vot'ry thought it best t' adjourn,<br/>

And not to carry on a work<br/>

Of such importance in the dark,                               920<br/>

With erring haste, but rather stay,<br/>

And do't in th' open face of day;<br/>

And in the mean time go in quest<br/>

Of next retreat to take his rest.<br/>
</p>

<h3 id="id00284" style="margin-top: 3em">CANTO II</h3>

<h4 id="id00285" style="margin-top: 2em">THE ARGUMENT.</h4>

<p id="id00286" style="margin-top: 2em">————————————————————————-<br/>

The Knight and Squire, in hot dispute,<br/>

Within an ace of falling out,<br/>

Are parted with a sudden fright<br/>

Of strange alarm, and stranger sight;<br/>

With which adventuring to stickle,<br/>

They're sent away in nasty pickle.<br/>

————————————————————————-<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00287" style="margin-top: 2em">'Tis strange how some mens' tempers suit<br/>

(Like bawd and brandy) with dispute,<br/>

That for their own opinions stand last<br/>

Only to have them claw'd and canvast;<br/>

That keep their consciences in cases,                           5<br/>

As fiddlers do their crowds and bases,<br/>

Ne'er to be us'd, but when they're bent<br/>

To play a fit for argument;<br/>

Make true and false, unjust and just,<br/>

Of no use but to be discust;                                   10<br/>

Dispute, and set a paradox<br/>

Like a straight boot upon the stocks,<br/>

And stretch it more unmercifully<br/>

Than HELMONT, MONTAIGN, WHITE, or TULLY,<br/>

So th' ancient &lt;n&gt; Stoicks, in their porch,                    15<br/>

With fierce dispute maintain'd their church;<br/>

Beat out their brains in fight and study,<br/>

To prove that Virtue is a Body;<br/>

That &lt;o&gt; Bonum is an Animal,<br/>

Made good with stout polemic brawl;                            20<br/>

in which some hundreds on the place<br/>

Were slain outright; and many a face<br/>

Retrench'd of nose, and eyes, and beard,<br/>

To maintain what their sect averr'd;<br/>

All which the Knight and Squire, in wrath,                     25<br/>

Had like t' have suffered for their faith,<br/>

Each striving to make good his own,<br/>

As by the sequel shall be shown.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00288">The Sun had long since, in the lap<br/>

Of THETIS, taken out his nap,                                  30<br/>

And, like a lobster boil'd, the morn<br/>

From black to red began to turn,<br/>

When HUDIBRAS, whom thoughts and aking,<br/>

'Twixt sleeping kept all night and waking,<br/>

Began to rub his drowsy eyes,                                  35<br/>

And from his couch prepar'd to rise,<br/>

Resolving to dispatch the deed<br/>

He vow'd to do with trusty speed.<br/>

But first, with knocking loud, and bawling,<br/>

He rouz'd the Squire, in truckle lolling;                      40<br/>

And, after many circumstances,<br/>

Which vulgar authors, in romances,<br/>

Do use to spend their time and wits on,<br/>

To make impertinent description,<br/>

They got (with much ado) to horse,                             45<br/>

And to the Castle bent their course,<br/>

In which he to the Dame before<br/>

To suffer whipping duly swore;<br/>

Where now arriv'd, and half unharnest,<br/>

To carry on the work in earnest,                               50<br/>

He stopp'd, and paus'd upon the sudden,<br/>

And with a serious forehead plodding,<br/>

Sprung a new scruple his head,<br/>

Which first he scratch'd, and after said —<br/>

Whether it be direct infringing                                55<br/>

An oath, if I should wave this swingeing,<br/>

And what I've sworn to bear, forbear,<br/>

And so b' equivocation swear,<br/>

Or whether it be a lesser sin<br/>

To be forsworn than act the thing,                             60<br/>

Are deep and subtle points, which must,<br/>

T' inform my conscience, be discust;<br/>

In which to err a tittle may<br/>

To errors infinite make way;<br/>

And therefore I desire to know                                 65<br/>

Thy judgment e'er we further go.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00289">Quoth Ralpho, Since you do enjoin't,<br/>

I shall enlarge upon the point;<br/>

And, for my own part, do not doubt<br/>

Th' affirmative may be made out,                               70<br/>

But first, to state the case aright,<br/>

For best advantage of our light,<br/>

And thus 'tis: Whether 't be a sin<br/>

To claw and curry your own skin,<br/>

Greater or less, than to forbear,                              75<br/>

And that you are forsworn, forswear.<br/>

But first, o' th' first: The inward man,<br/>

And outward, like a clan and clan,<br/>

Have always been at daggers-drawing,<br/>

And one another clapper-clawing.                               80<br/>

Not that they really cuff, or fence,<br/>

But in a Spiritual Mystick sense;<br/>

Which to mistake, and make 'em squabble<br/>

In literal fray's abominable.<br/>

'Tis heathenish, in frequent use                               85<br/>

With Pagans and apostate Jews,<br/>

To offer sacrifice of bridewells,<br/>

Like modern Indians to their idols;<br/>

And mongrel Christians of our times,<br/>

That expiate less with greater crimes,                         90<br/>

And call the foul abomination,<br/>

Contrition and mortification.<br/>

Is 't not enough we're bruis'd and kicked<br/>

With sinful members of the wicked,<br/>

Our vessels, that are sanctify'd,                              95<br/>

Prophan'd and curry'd back and side,<br/>

But we must claw ourselves with shameful<br/>

And heathen stripes, by their example;<br/>

Which (were there nothing to forbid it)<br/>

Is impious because they did it;                               100<br/>

This, therefore, may be justly reckon'd<br/>

A heinous sin. Now to the second<br/>

That Saints may claim a dispensation<br/>

To swear and forswear, on occasion,<br/>

I doubt not but it will appear                                105<br/>

With pregnant light: the point is clear.<br/>

Oaths are but words, and words but wind;<br/>

Too feeble implements to bind;<br/>

And hold with deeds proportion so<br/>

As shadows to a substance do.                                 110<br/>

Then when they strive for place, 'tis fit<br/>

The weaker vessel should submit.<br/>

Although your Church be opposite<br/>

To ours as Black Friars are to White,<br/>

In rule and order, yet I grant,                               115<br/>

You are a Reformado Saint;<br/>

And what the Saints do claim as due,<br/>

You may pretend a title to:<br/>

But Saints whom oaths and vows oblige,<br/>

Know little of their privilege;                               120<br/>

Further (I mean) than carrying on<br/>

Some self-advantage of their own:<br/>

For if the Dev'l, to serve his turn,<br/>

Can tell troth, why the Saints should scorn,<br/>

When it serves theirs, to swear and lye;                      125<br/>

I think there's little reason why:<br/>

Else h' has a greater pow'r than they,<br/>

Which 't were impiety to say.<br/>

W' are not commanded to forbear<br/>

Indefinitely at all to swear;                                 130<br/>

But to swear idly, and in vain,<br/>

Without self-interest or gain<br/>

For breaking of an oath, and lying,<br/>

Is but a kind of self-denying;<br/>

A Saint-like virtue: and from hence                           135<br/>

Some have broke oaths by Providence<br/>

Some, to the glory of the Lord,<br/>

Perjur'd themselves, and broke their word;<br/>

And this the constant rule and practice<br/>

Of all our late Apostles acts is.                             140<br/>

Was not the cause at first begun<br/>

With perjury, and carried on?<br/>

Was there an oath the Godly took,<br/>

But in due time and place they broke?<br/>

Did we not bring our oaths in first,                          145<br/>

Before our plate, to have them burst,<br/>

And cast in fitter models for<br/>

The present use of Church and War?<br/>

Did not our Worthies of the House,<br/>

Before they broke the peace, break vows?                      150<br/>

For having freed us first from both<br/>

Th' Allegiance and Supremacy Oath,<br/>

Did they not next compel the Nation<br/>

To take and break the Protestation?<br/>

To swear, and after to recant                                 155<br/>

The solemn League and Covenant?<br/>

To take th' Engagement, and disclaim it,<br/>

Enforc'd by those who first did frame it<br/>

Did they not swear, at first, to fight<br/>

For the KING'S Safety and his Right,                          160<br/>

And after march'd to find him out,<br/>

And charg'd him home with horse and foot;<br/>

But yet still had the confidence<br/>

To swear it was in his defence<br/>

Did they not swear to live and die                            165<br/>

With Essex, and straight laid him by?<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00290">If that were all, for some have swore<br/>

As false as they, if th' did no more,<br/>

Did they not swear to maintain Law,<br/>

In which that swearing made a flaw?                           170<br/>

For Protestant Religion vow,<br/>

That did that vowing disallow?<br/>

For Privilege of Parliament,<br/>

In which that swearing made a rent?<br/>

And since, of all the three, not one                          175<br/>

Is left in being, 'tis well known.<br/>

Did they not swear, in express words,<br/>

To prop and back the House of Lords,<br/>

And after turn'd out the whole House-full<br/>

Of Peers, as dang'rous and unusefull?                         180<br/>

So CROMWELL, with deep oaths and vows,<br/>

Swore all the Commons out o' th' House;<br/>

Vow'd that the red-coats would disband,<br/>

Ay, marry wou'd they, at their command;<br/>

And troll'd them on, and swore, and swore,                    185<br/>

Till th' army turn'd them out of door.<br/>

This tells us plainly what they thought,<br/>

That oaths and swearing go for nought,<br/>

And that by them th' were only meant<br/>

To serve for an expedient.                                    190<br/>

What was the Public Faith found out for,<br/>

But to slur men of what they fought for<br/>

The Public Faith, which ev'ry one<br/>

Is bound t' observe, yet kept by none;<br/>

And if that go for nothing, why                               195<br/>

Should Private Faith have such a tye?<br/>

Oaths were not purpos'd more than law,<br/>

To keep the good and just in awe,<br/>

But to confine the bad and sinful,<br/>

Like moral cattle, in a pinfold.                              200<br/>

A Saint's of th' Heav'nly Realm a Peer;<br/>

And as no Peer is bound to swear,<br/>

But on the Gospel of his Honour,<br/>

Of which he may dispose as owner,<br/>

It follows, though the thing be forgery,                      205<br/>

And false th' affirm, it is no perjury,<br/>

But a mere ceremony, and a breach<br/>

Of nothing, but a form of speech;<br/>

And goes for no more when 'tis took,<br/>

Than mere saluting of the book.                               210<br/>

Suppose the Scriptures are of force,<br/>

They're but commissions of course,<br/>

And Saints have freedom to digress,<br/>

And vary from 'em, as they please;<br/>

Or mis-interpret them, by private                             215<br/>

Instructions, to all aims they drive at.<br/>

Then why should we ourselves abridge<br/>

And curtail our own privilege?<br/>

Quakers (that, like to lanthorns, bear<br/>

Their light within 'em) will not swear                        220<br/>

Their gospel is an accidence,<br/>

By which they construe conscience,<br/>

And hold no sin so deeply red,<br/>

As that of breaking Priscian's head;<br/>

(The head and founder of their order,)                        225<br/>

That stirring Hat's held worse than murder.<br/>

These thinking th' are oblig'd to troth<br/>

In swearing, will not take an oath<br/>

Like mules, who, if th' have not their will<br/>

To keep their own pace, stand stock-still:                    230<br/>

But they are weak, and little know<br/>

What free-born consciences may do.<br/>

'Tis the temptation of the Devil<br/>

That makes all human actions evil<br/>

For Saints may do the same things by                          235<br/>

The Spirit, in sincerity,<br/>

Which other men are tempted to,<br/>

And at the Devil's instance do<br/>

And yet the actions be contrary,<br/>

Just as the Saints and Wicked vary.                           240<br/>

For as on land there is no beast,<br/>

But in some fish at sea's exprest,<br/>

So in the Wicked there's no Vice,<br/>

Of which the Saints have not a spice;<br/>

And yet that thing that's pious in                            245<br/>

The one, in th' other is a sin.<br/>

Is't not ridiculous, and nonsense,<br/>

A Saint should be a slave to conscience,<br/>

That ought to be above such fancies,<br/>

As far as above ordinances?                                   250<br/>

She's of the wicked, as I guess,<br/>

B' her looks, her language, and her dress:<br/>

And though, like constables, we search,<br/>

For false wares, one another's Church,<br/>

Yet all of us hold this for true,                             255<br/>

No Faith is to the wicked due;<br/>

For truth is precious and divine;<br/>

Too rich a pearl for carnal swine,<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00291">Quoth HUDIBRAS, All this is true;                             260<br/>

Yet 'tis not fit that all men knew,<br/>

Those mysteries and revelations,<br/>

And therefore topical evasions<br/>

Of subtle turns and shifts of sense,<br/>

Serve best with th' wicked for pretence,<br/>

Such as the learned Jesuits use,                              265<br/>

And Presbyterians for excuse<br/>

Against the Protestants, when th' happen<br/>

To find their Churches taken napping:<br/>

As thus: A breach of oath is duple,<br/>

And either way admits a scruple,                              270<br/>

And may be, ex parte of the maker<br/>

More criminal than th' injur'd taker;<br/>

For he that strains too far a vow,<br/>

Will break it, like an o'er-bent bow:<br/>

And he that made, and forc'd it, broke it,                    275<br/>

Not he that for convenience took it.<br/>

A broken oath is, quatenus oath,<br/>

As sound t' all purposes of troth,<br/>

As broken laws are ne'er the worse;<br/>

Nay, till th' are broken have no force.                       280<br/>

What's justice to a man, or laws,<br/>

That never comes within their claws<br/>

They have no pow'r, but to admonish:<br/>

Cannot controul, coerce, or punish,<br/>

Until they're broken, and then touch                          285<br/>

Those only that do make 'em such.<br/>

Beside, no engagement is allow'd<br/>

By men in prison made for good;<br/>

For when they're set at liberty,<br/>

They're from th' engagement too set free.                     290<br/>

The rabbins write, when any Jew<br/>

Did make to God, or man, a vow,<br/>

Which afterward he found untoward,<br/>

And stubborn to be kept, or too hard,<br/>

Any three other Jews o' th' nation,                           295<br/>

Might free him from the obligation<br/>

And have not two saints pow'r to use<br/>

A greater privilege than three Jews?<br/>

The court of conscience, which in man<br/>

Should be supreme and sovereign,                              300<br/>

Is't fit should be subordinate<br/>

To ev'ry petty court i' the state,<br/>

And have less power than the lesser,<br/>

To deal with perjury at pleasure?<br/>

Have its proceedings disallow'd, or                           305<br/>

Allow'd, at fancy of Pye-Powder?<br/>

Tell all it does, or does not know,<br/>

For swearing ex officio?<br/>

Be forc'd t' impeach a broken hedge,<br/>

And pigs unring'd at Vis. Franc. Pledge?                      310<br/>

Discover thieves, and bawds, recusants,<br/>

Priests, witches, eves-droppers, and nuisance:<br/>

Tell who did play at games unlawful,<br/>

And who fill'd pots of ale but half-full<br/>

And have no pow'r at all, nor shift,                          315<br/>

To help itself at a dead lift<br/>

Why should not conscience have vacation<br/>

As well as other courts o' th' nation<br/>

Have equal power to adjourn,<br/>

Appoint appearance and return;                                320<br/>

And make as nice distinction serve<br/>

To split a case, as those that carve,<br/>

Invoking cuckolds' names, hit joints;<br/>

Why should not tricks as slight do points<br/>

Is not th' High-Court of Justice sworn                        325<br/>

To judge that law that serves their turn,<br/>

Make their own jealousies high-treason,<br/>

And fix 'm whomsoe'er they please on?<br/>

Cannot the learned counsel there<br/>

Make laws in any shape appear?                                330<br/>

Mould 'em as witches do their clay,<br/>

When they make pictures to destroy<br/>

And vex 'em into any form<br/>

That fits their purpose to do harm?<br/>

Rack 'em until they do confess,                               335<br/>

Impeach of treason whom they please,<br/>

And most perfidiously condemn<br/>

Those that engag'd their lives for them?<br/>

And yet do nothing in their own sense,<br/>

But what they ought by oath and conscience?                   340<br/>

Can they not juggle, and, with slight<br/>

Conveyance, play with wrong and right;<br/>

And sell their blasts of wind as dear<br/>

As Lapland witches bottled air?<br/>

Will not fear, favour, bribe and grudge                       345<br/>

The same case sev'ral ways adjudge?<br/>

As seamen, with the self-same gale,<br/>

Will sev'ral different courses sail?<br/>

As when the sea breaks o'er its bounds,<br/>

And overflows the level grounds,                              350<br/>

Those banks and dams, that, like a screen,<br/>

Did keep it out, now keep it in;<br/>

So when tyrannic usurpation<br/>

Invades the freedom of a nation,<br/>

The laws o' th' land, that were intended                      355<br/>

To keep it out, are made defend it.<br/>

Does not in chanc'ry ev'ry man swear<br/>

What makes best for him in his answer?<br/>

Is not the winding up witnesses<br/>

And nicking more than half the bus'ness?                      360<br/>

For witnesses, like watches, go<br/>

Just as they're set, too fast or slow;<br/>

And where in conscience they're strait-lac'd,<br/>

'Tis ten to one that side is cast.<br/>

Do not your juries give their verdict                         365<br/>

As if they felt the cause, not heard it?<br/>

And as they please, make matter of fact<br/>

Run all on one side, as they're pack't?<br/>

Nature has made man's breast no windores,<br/>

To publish what he does within doors,                         370<br/>

Nor what dark secrets there inhabit,<br/>

Unless his own rash folly blab it.<br/>

If oaths can do a man no good<br/>

In his own bus'ness, why they shou'd<br/>

In other matters do him hurt,                                 375<br/>

I think there's little reason for't.<br/>

He that imposes an oath, makes it,<br/>

Not he that for convenience takes it:<br/>

Then how can any man be said<br/>

To break an oath he never made?                               380<br/>

These reasons may, perhaps, look oddly<br/>

To th' Wicked, though th' evince the Godly;<br/>

But if they will not serve to clear<br/>

My honour, I am ne'er the near.<br/>

Honour is like that glassy bubble                             385<br/>

That finds philosophers such trouble,<br/>

Whose least part crack't, the whole does fly,<br/>

And wits are crack'd to find out why.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00292">Quoth RALPHO, Honour's but a word<br/>

To swear by only in a Lord:                                   390<br/>

In other men 'tis but a huff,<br/>

To vapour with instead of proof;<br/>

That, like a wen, looks big and swells,<br/>

Is senseless, and just nothing else.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00293">Let it (quoth he) be what it will,                            395<br/>

It has the world's opinion still.<br/>

But as men are not wise that run<br/>

The slightest hazard they may shun,<br/>

There may a medium be found out<br/>

To clear to all the world the doubt;                          400<br/>

And that is, if a man may do't,<br/>

By proxy whipt, or substitute.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00294">Though nice and dark the point appear,<br/>

(Quoth RALPH) it may hold up and clear.<br/>

That sinners may supply the place                             405<br/>

Of suff'ring Saints is a plain case.<br/>

Justice gives sentence many times<br/>

On one man for another's crimes.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00295">Our brethren of NEW ENGLAND use<br/>

Choice malefactors to excuse,                                 410<br/>

And hang the guiltless in their stead,<br/>

Of whom the Churches have less need;<br/>

As lately 't happen'd: In a town &lt;p&gt;<br/>

There liv'd a cobler, and but one,<br/>

That out of doctrine could cut use,                           415<br/>

And mend men's lives as well as shoes,<br/>

This precious brother having slain,<br/>

In time of peace, an Indian,<br/>

(Not out of malice, but mere zeal,<br/>

Because he was an Infidel,)                                   420<br/>

The mighty TOTTIPOTTYMOY<br/>

Sent to our elders an envoy,<br/>

Complaining sorely of the breach<br/>

Of league held forth by brother Patch<br/>

Against the articles in force                                 425<br/>

Between both Churches, his and ours<br/>

For which he crav'd the Saints to render<br/>

Into his hands or hang th' offender<br/>

But they maturely having weigh'd,<br/>

They had no more but him o' th' trade,                        430<br/>

(A man that serv'd them in a double<br/>

Capacity, to teach and cobble,)<br/>

Resolv'd to spare him; yet, to do<br/>

The Indian Hoghgan Moghgan too<br/>

Impartial justice, in his stead did                           435<br/>

Hang an old Weaver, that was bed-rid.<br/>

Then wherefore way not you be skipp'd,<br/>

And in your room another whipp'd?<br/>

For all Philosophers, but the Sceptick,<br/>

Hold whipping may be sympathetick.                            440<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00296">It is enough, quoth HUDIBRAS,<br/>

Thou hast resolv'd and clear'd the case<br/>

And canst, in conscience, not refuse<br/>

From thy own doctrine to raise use.<br/>

I know thou wilt not (for my sake)                            445<br/>

Be tender-conscienc'd of thy back.<br/>

Then strip thee off thy carnal jerking,<br/>

And give thy outward-fellow a ferking;<br/>

For when thy vessel is new hoop'd,<br/>

All leaks of sinning will be stopp'd.                         450<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00297">Quoth RALPHO, You mistake the matter;<br/>

For in all scruples of this nature,<br/>

No man includes himself, nor turns<br/>

The point upon his own concerns.<br/>

As no man of his own self catches                             455<br/>

The itch, or amorous French aches<br/>

So no man does himself convince,<br/>

By his own doctrine, of his sins<br/>

And though all cry down self, none means<br/>

His ownself in a literal sense.                               460<br/>

Beside, it is not only foppish,<br/>

But vile, idolatrous and Popish,<br/>

For one man, out of his own skin,<br/>

To ferk and whip another's sin;<br/>

As pedants out of school-boys' breeches                       465<br/>

Do claw and curry their own itches.<br/>

But in this case it is prophane,<br/>

And sinful too, because in vain;<br/>

For we must take our oaths upon it,<br/>

You did the deed, when I have done it.                        470<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00298">Quoth HUDIBRAS, That's answer'd soon<br/>

Give us the whip, we'll lay it on.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00299">Quoth RALPHO, That we may swear true,<br/>

'Twere properer that I whipp'd you<br/>

For when with your consent 'tis done,                         475<br/>

The act is really your own.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00300">Quoth HUDIBRAS, It is in vain<br/>

(I see) to argue 'gainst the grain;<br/>

Or, like the stars, incline men to<br/>

What they're averse themselves to do:                         480<br/>

For when disputes are weary'd out,<br/>

'Tis interest still resolves the doubt<br/>

But since no reason can confute ye,<br/>

I'll try to force you to your duty<br/>

For so it is, howe'er you mince it;                           485<br/>

As ere we part, I shall evince it<br/>

And curry (if you stand out) whether<br/>

You will or no, your stubborn leather.<br/>

Canst thou refuse to hear thy part<br/>

I' th' publick work, base as thou art?                        490<br/>

To higgle thus for a few blows,<br/>

To gain thy Knight an op'lent spouse<br/>

Whose wealth his bowels yearn to purchase,<br/>

Merely for th' interest of the Churches;<br/>

And when he has it in his claws,                              495<br/>

Will not be hide-bound to the Cause?<br/>

Nor shalt thou find him a Curmudgin,<br/>

If thou dispatch it without grudging.<br/>

If not, resolve, before we go,<br/>

That you and I must pull a crow.                              500<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00301">Y' had best (quoth RALPHO) as the ancients<br/>

Say wisely, Have a care o' th' main chance,<br/>

And look before you ere you leap;<br/>

For as you sow, y' are like to reap:<br/>

And were y' as good as George-a-Green,                        505<br/>

I shall make bold to turn agen<br/>

Nor am I doubtful of the issue<br/>

In a just quarrel, and mine is so.<br/>

Is't fitting for a man of honour<br/>

To whip the Saints, like Bishop Bonner?                       510<br/>

A Knight t' usurp the beadle's office,<br/>

For which y' are like to raise brave trophies.<br/>

But I advise you (not for fear,<br/>

But for your own sake) to forbear;<br/>

And for the Churches, which may chance,                       515<br/>

From hence, to spring a variance;<br/>

And raise among themselves new scruples,<br/>

Whom common danger hardly couples.<br/>

Remember how, in arms and politicks,<br/>

We still have worsted all your holy tricks;                   520<br/>

Trepann'd your party with intrigue,<br/>

And took your grandees down a peg;<br/>

New modell'd th' army, and cashier'd<br/>

All that to legion SMEC adher'd;<br/>

Made a mere utensil o' your Church,                           525<br/>

And after left it in the lurch<br/>

A scaffold to build up our own,<br/>

And, when w' had done with't, pull'd it down<br/>

Capoch'd your Rabbins of the Synod,<br/>

And snap'd their Canons with a why-not;                       530<br/>

(Grave Synod Men, that were rever'd<br/>

For solid face and depth of beard;)<br/>

Their classic model prov'd a maggot,<br/>

Their direct'ry an Indian Pagod;<br/>

And drown'd their discipline like a kitten,                   535<br/>

On which they'd been so long a sitting;<br/>

Decry'd it as a holy cheat,<br/>

Grown out of date, and obsolete;<br/>

And all the Saints of the first grass<br/>

As casting foals of Balaam's ass.                             540<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00302">At this the Knight grew high in chafe,<br/>

And staring furiously on RALPH,<br/>

He trembled, and look'd pale with ire<br/>

Like ashes first, then red as fire.<br/>

Have I (quoth he) been ta'en in fight,                        545<br/>

And for so many moons lain by't,<br/>

And, when all other means did fail,<br/>

&lt;q&gt; Have been exchang'd for tubs of ale?<br/>

Not but they thought me worth a ransome<br/>

Much more consid'rable and handsome,                          550<br/>

But for their own sakes, and for fear<br/>

They were not safe when I was there<br/>

Now to be baffled by a scoundrel,<br/>

An upstart sect'ry, and a mungrel;<br/>

Such as breed out of peccant humours,                         555<br/>

Of our own Church, like wens or tumours,<br/>

And, like a maggot in a sore,<br/>

Would that which gave it life devour;<br/>

It never shall be done or said;<br/>

With that he seiz'd upon his blade;                           560<br/>

And RALPHO too, as quick and bold,<br/>

Upon his basket-hilt laid hold,<br/>

With equal readiness prcpar'd<br/>

To draw, and stand upon his guard;<br/>

When both were parted on the sudden,                          565<br/>

 With hideous clamour, and a loud one<br/>

As if all sorts of noise had been<br/>

Contracted into one loud din;<br/>

Or that some member to be chosen,<br/>

Had got the odds above a thousand,                            570<br/>

And by the greatness of its noise,<br/>

Prov'd fittest for his country's choice.<br/>

This strange surprisal put the Knight<br/>

And wrathful Squire into a fright;<br/>

And though they stood prepar'd, with fatal                    575<br/>

Impetuous rancour to join battel,<br/>

Both thought it was the wisest course<br/>

To wave the fight and mount to horse,<br/>

And to secure by swift retreating,<br/>

Themselves from danger of worse beating.                      580<br/>

Yet neither of them would disparage,<br/>

By utt'ring of his mind, his courage,<br/>

Which made them stoutly keep their ground,<br/>

With horror and disdain wind-bound.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00303">And now the cause of all their fear                           585<br/>

By slow degrees approach'd so near,<br/>

They might distinguish different noise<br/>

Of horns, and pans, and dogs, and boys,<br/>

And kettle-drums, whose sullen dub<br/>

Sounds like the hooping of a tub.                             590<br/>

But when the sight appear'd in view,<br/>

They found it was an antique show;<br/>

A triumph, that, for pomp and state,<br/>

Did proudest Romans emulate:<br/>

For as the aldermen of Rome                                   595<br/>

Their foes at training overcome,<br/>

And not enlarging territory,<br/>

(As some mistaken write in Story,)<br/>

Being mounted, in their best array,<br/>

Upon a carr, and who but they!                                600<br/>

And follow'd with a world of tall-lads,<br/>

That merry ditties troll'd, and ballads,<br/>

Did ride with many a good-morrow,<br/>

Crying, Hey for our Town! through the Borough<br/>

So when this triumph drew so nigh                             605<br/>

They might particulars descry,<br/>

They never saw two things so pat,<br/>

In all respects, as this and that.<br/>

First, he that led the cavalcade,<br/>

Wore a sow-gelder's flagellate,                               610<br/>

On which he blew as strong a levet<br/>

As well-fee'd lawyer on his breviate,<br/>

When over one another's heads<br/>

They charge (three ranks at once) like Swedes,<br/>

Next pans and kettle, of all keys,                            615<br/>

From trebles down to double base;<br/>

And after them, upon a nag,<br/>

That might pass for a forehand stag,<br/>

A cornet rode, and on his staff<br/>

A smock display'd did proudly wave.                           620<br/>

Then bagpipes of the loudest drones,<br/>

With snuffling broken-winded tones,<br/>

Whose blasts of air, in pockets shut<br/>

Sound filthier than from the gut,<br/>

And make a viler noise than swine                             625<br/>

In windy weather, when they whine.<br/>

Next one upon a pair of panniers,<br/>

Full fraught with that which for good manners<br/>

Shall here be nameless, mixt with grains,<br/>

Which he dispens'd among the swains,                          630<br/>

And busily upon the crowd<br/>

At random round about bestow'd.<br/>

Then, mounted on a horned horse,<br/>

One bore a gauntlet and gilt spurs,<br/>

Ty'd to the pummel of a long sword                            635<br/>

He held reverst, the point turn'd downward,<br/>

Next after, on a raw-bon'd steed,<br/>

The conqueror's standard-bearer rid,<br/>

And bore aloft before the champion<br/>

A petticoat display'd, and rampant                            640<br/>

Near whom the Amazon triumphant<br/>

Bestrid her beast, and on the rump on't<br/>

Sat face to tail, and bum to bum,<br/>

The warrior whilom overcome;<br/>

Arm'd with a spindle and a distaff,                           645<br/>

Which, as he rode, she made him twist off;<br/>

And when he loiter'd, o'er her shoulder<br/>

Chastis'd the reformado soldier.<br/>

Before the dame, and round about,<br/>

March'd whifflers and staffiers on foot,                      650<br/>

With lackies, grooms, valets, and pages,<br/>

In fit and proper equipages;<br/>

Of whom some torches bore, some links,<br/>

Before the proud virago minx,<br/>

That was both Madam and a Don,                                655<br/>

Like NERO'S SPORUS, or POPE JOAN;<br/>

And at fit periods the whole rout<br/>

Set up their throats with clamorous shout.<br/>

The Knight, transported, and the Squire,<br/>

Put up their weapons, and their ire;                          660<br/>

And HUDIBRAS, who us'd to ponder<br/>

On such sights with judicious wonder,<br/>

Could hold no longer to impart<br/>

His animadversions, for his heart.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00304">Quoth he, In all my life, till now,                           665<br/>

I ne'er saw so prophane a show.<br/>

It is a Paganish invention, —<br/>

Which heathen writers often mention:<br/>

And he who made it had read GOODWIN,<br/>

Or Ross, or CAELIUS RHODOGINE,                                670<br/>

With all the Grecians, SPEEDS and STOWS,<br/>

That best describe those ancient shows;<br/>

And has observ'd all fit decorums<br/>

We find describ'd by old historians:<br/>

For as the Roman conqueror,                                   675<br/>

That put an end to foreign war,<br/>

Ent'ring the town in triumph for it,<br/>

&lt;r&gt; Bore a slave with him, in his chariot;<br/>

So this insulting female brave,<br/>

Carries behind her here a slave:                              680<br/>

And as the ancients long ago,<br/>

When they in field defy'd the foe,<br/>

&lt;s&gt; Hung out their mantles della guerre,<br/>

So her proud standard-bearer here<br/>

Waves on his spear, in dreadful manner,                       685<br/>

A Tyrian-petticoat for banner:<br/>

&lt;t&gt; Next links and torches, heretofore<br/>

Still borne before the emperor.<br/>

And as, in antique triumphs, eggs<br/>

Were borne for mystical intrigues,                            690<br/>

There's one with truncheon, like a ladle,<br/>

That carries eggs too, fresh or addle;<br/>

And still at random, as he goes,<br/>

Among the rabble-rout bestows.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00305">Quoth Ralpho, You mistake the matter;                         695<br/>

For all th' antiquity you smatter,<br/>

Is but a riding, us'd of course<br/>

When the grey mare's the better horse;<br/>

When o'er the breeches greedy women<br/>

Fight to extend their vast dominion;                          700<br/>

And in the cause impatient Grizel<br/>

Has drubb'd her Husband with bull's pizzle,<br/>

And brought him under Covert-Baron,<br/>

To turn her vassal with a murrain;<br/>

When wives their sexes shift, like hares,                     705<br/>

And ride their husbands like night-mares,<br/>

And they in mortal battle vanquish'd,<br/>

Are of their charter disenfranchis'd<br/>

And by the right of war, like gills,<br/>

Condemn'd to distaff, horns, and wheels:                      710<br/>

For when men by their wives are cow'd,<br/>

Their horns of course are understood<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00306">Quoth HUDIBRAS thou still giv'st sentence<br/>

Impertinently, and against sense.<br/>

Tis not the least disparagement                               715<br/>

To be defeated by th' event,<br/>

Nor to be beaten by main force;<br/>

That does not make a man the worse,<br/>

Although his shoulders with battoon<br/>

Be claw'd and cudgel'd to some tune.                          720<br/>

A taylor's 'prentice has no hard<br/>

Measure that's bang'd with a true yard:<br/>

But to turn tail, or run away,<br/>

And without blows give up the day,<br/>

Or to surrender ere th' assault,                              725<br/>

That's no man's fortune, but his fault,<br/>

And renders men of honour less<br/>

Than all th' adversity of success;<br/>

And only unto such this shew<br/>

Of horns and petticoats is due.                               730<br/>

There is a lesser profanation,<br/>

Like that the Romans call'd ovation:<br/>

For as ovation was allow'd<br/>

For conquest purchas'd without blood,<br/>

So men decree these lesser shows                              735<br/>

For victory gotten without blows,<br/>

By dint of sharp hard words, which some<br/>

Give battle with, and overcome.<br/>

These mounted in a chair-curule,<br/>

Which moderns call a cucking-stool,                           740<br/>

March proudly to the river's side,<br/>

And o'er the waves in triumph ride;<br/>

Like Dukes of VENICE, who are said<br/>

The Adriatick Sea to wed;<br/>

And have a gentler wife than those                            745<br/>

For whom the State decrees those shows,<br/>

But both are heathenish, and come<br/>

From th' whores of Babylon and Rome;<br/>

And by the Saints should be withstood,<br/>

As Antichristian and lewd;                                    750<br/>

And as such, should now contribute<br/>

Our utmost struggling to prohibit.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00307">This said, they both advanc'd, and rode<br/>

A dog-trot through the bawling crowd,<br/>

T'attack the leader, and still prest,                         755<br/>

Till they approach'd him breast to breast<br/>

Then HUDIBRAS, with face and hand,<br/>

Made signs for silence; which obtain'd,<br/>

What means (quoth he) this Devil's precession<br/>

With men of orthodox profession?                              760<br/>

'Tis ethnic and idolatrous,<br/>

From heathenism deriv'd to us,<br/>

Does not the Whore of Babylon ride<br/>

Upon her horned beast astride<br/>

Like this proud dame, who either is                           765<br/>

A type of her, or she of this?<br/>

Are things of superstitious function<br/>

Fit to be us'd in Gospel Sun-shine?<br/>

It is an Antichristian opera,<br/>

Much us'd in midnight times of Popery,                        770<br/>

Of running after self-inventions<br/>

Of wicked and profane intentions;<br/>

To scandalize that sex for scolding,<br/>

To whom the Saints are so beholden.<br/>

Women, who were our first Apostles                            775<br/>

Without whose aid we had been lost else;<br/>

Women, that left no stone unturn'd<br/>

In which the Cause might he concern'd;<br/>

Brought in their children's' spoons and whistles,<br/>

To purchase swords, carbines, and pistols;                    780<br/>

Their husbands, cullies, and sweet-hearts,<br/>

To take the Saints and Churches' parts;<br/>

Drew several gifted Brethren in,<br/>

That for the Bishops would have been,<br/>

And fix'd 'em constant to the party,                          785<br/>

With motives powerful and hearty;<br/>

Their husbands robb'd, and made hard shifts<br/>

T'administer unto their gifts<br/>

All they cou'd rap, and rend, and pilfer,<br/>

To scraps and ends of gold and silver;                        790<br/>

Rubb'd down the Teachers, tir'd and spent<br/>

With holding forth for Parliament,<br/>

Pamper'd and edify'd their zeal<br/>

With marrow-puddings many a meal;<br/>

And led them, with store of meat,                             795<br/>

On controverted points to eat;<br/>

And cram'd 'em, till their guts did ake,<br/>

With cawdle, custard, and plum-cake:<br/>

What have they done, or what left undone,<br/>

That might advance the Cause at London?                       800<br/>

March'd rank and file, with drum and ensign,<br/>

T'intrench the city for defence in<br/>

Rais'd rampiers with their own soft hands,<br/>

To put the enemy to stands;<br/>

From ladies down to oyster-wenches,                           805<br/>

Labour'd like pioneers in trenches;<br/>

Fell to their pick-axes, and tools,<br/>

And help'd the men to dig like moles?<br/>

Have not the handmaids of the city<br/>

Chose of their members a committee,                           810<br/>

For raising of a common purse<br/>

Out of their wages to raise horse?<br/>

And do they not as triers sit,<br/>

To judge what officers are fit<br/>

Have they —? At that an egg let fly,                         815<br/>

Hit him directly o'er the eye,<br/>

And running down his cheek, besmear'd,<br/>

With orange tawny slime, his beard;<br/>

But beard and slime being of one hue,<br/>

The wound the less appear'd in view.                          820<br/>

Then he that on the panniers rode,<br/>

Let fly on th' other side a load,<br/>

And, quickly charg'd again, gave fully<br/>

In RALPHO'S face another volley.<br/>

The Knight was startled with the smell,                       825<br/>

And for his sword began to feel;<br/>

And RALPHO, smother'd with the stink,<br/>

Grasp'd his; when one, that bore a link,<br/>

O' th' sudden clapp'd his flaming cudgel,<br/>

Like linstock, to the horse's touch-hole;                     830<br/>

And straight another, with his flambeaux,<br/>

Gave RALPHO'S o'er the eye a damn'd blow.<br/>

The beasts began to kick and fling,<br/>

And forc'd the rout to make a ring,<br/>

Through which they quickly broke their way,                   835<br/>

And brought them off from further fray;<br/>

And though disorder'd in retreat,<br/>

Each of them stoutly kept his seat<br/>

For quitting both their swords and reins,<br/>

They grasp'd with all their strength the manes,               840<br/>

And, to avoid the foe's pursuit,<br/>

With spurring put their cattle to't;<br/>

And till all four were out of wind,<br/>

And danger too, ne'er look'd behind.<br/>

After th' had paus'd a while, supplying                       845<br/>

Their spirits, spent with fight and flying,<br/>

And HUDIBRAS recruited force<br/>

Of lungs, for action or discourse,<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00308">Quoth he, That man is sure to lose<br/>

That fouls his hands with dirty foes:                         850<br/>

For where no honour's to be gain'd,<br/>

'Tis thrown away in b'ing maintain'd.<br/>

'Twas ill for us we had to do<br/>

With so dishonourable a foe:<br/>

For though the law of arms doth bar                           855<br/>

The use of venom'd shot in war,<br/>

Yet, by the nauseous smell, and noisome,<br/>

Their case-shot savours strong of poison;<br/>

And doubtless have been chew'd with teeth<br/>

Of some that had a stinking breath;                           860<br/>

Else, when we put it to the push,<br/>

They have not giv'n us such a brush.<br/>

But as those pultroons, that fling dirt,<br/>

Do but defile, but cannot hurt,<br/>

So all the honour they have won,                              865<br/>

Or we have lost, is much as one,<br/>

'Twas well we made so resolute<br/>

And brave retreat without pursuit;<br/>

For if we had not, we had sped<br/>

Much worse, to be in triumph led;                             870<br/>

Than which the ancients held no state<br/>

Of man's life more unfortunate.<br/>

But if this bold adventure e'er<br/>

Do chance to reach the widow's ear,<br/>

It may, b'ing destin'd to assert                              875<br/>

Her sex's honour, reach her heart:<br/>

And as such homely treats (they say)<br/>

Portend good fortune, so this may.<br/>

&lt;u&gt; VESPASIAN being daub'd with dirt,<br/>

Was destin'd to the empire for't;                             880<br/>

And from a Scavenger did come<br/>

To be a mighty Prince in Rome<br/>

And why may not this foul address<br/>

Presage in love the same success<br/>

Then let us straight, to cleanse our wounds,                  885<br/>

Advance in quest of nearest ponds,<br/>

And after (as we first design'd)<br/>

Swear I've perform'd what she enjoin'd.<br/>
</p>

<h4 id="id00309" style="margin-top: 2em">NOTES TO PART II. CANTO II.</h4>

<p id="id00310" style="margin-top: 2em">15 &lt;n&gt; So th' ancient Stoicks, &amp;c.] In Porticu (Stoicorum
Schola Athenis) Discipulorum Seditionibus mille Quadrigenti
triginta Cives interfecti sunt. — Diog. Laert. In Vita Zenonis, p.
383. [One thousand four hundred and thirty citizens were killed
in the quarrels of the disciples in the porch (of the Stoic School
of Athens).] Those old Virtuosos were better proficients in
those exercises than modern, who seldom improve higher than
cuffing and kicking.</p>

<p id="id00311">19 &lt;o&gt; Bonum is such a kind of animal as our modern virtuosi
from Don Quixote will have windmills under sail to be.  The
same authors are of opinion, that all ships are fishes while they
are afloat; but when they are run on ground, &amp; laid up, in the
dock, become ships again.</p>

<p id="id00312">413 &lt;p&gt; in a town, &amp;c.] The history of the Cobler had been
attested by persons of good credit, who were upon the place
when it was done.</p>

<p id="id00313">548 &lt;q&gt; Have been exchang'd, &amp;c.] The knight was kept
prisoner in Exeter, and, after several exchanges proposed, but
none accepted of, was at last released for a barrel of ale, as he
often used to declare.</p>

<p id="id00314">678 &lt;r&gt; Bore a slave with him in his chariot.
    ——— Et sibi Consul
    Me placeat, curru servus portatur eodem.
[And it pleased the Consul to have me carried as a slave in his
chariot]</p>

<p id="id00315">683 &lt;s&gt; Hung out, &amp;c.] Tunica Coccinia solebat pridie quam
dimicandum esset, supra praetorium poni, quasi admonito, &amp;
indicium futurae pugnae. [The praetors wore scarlet tunics on
the day before the battle, for a warning, and a portent of the
future. ] Lipsius in Tacit. p. 56.</p>

<p id="id00316" style="margin-top: 2em">687 &lt;t&gt; next links, &amp;c.] That the Roman Emperors were wont
to have torches borne before them (by day) appears by Herodian
in Pertinace. Lipsius in Tacit. p. 16.</p>

<p id="id00317">879 &lt;u&gt; Vespasian being dawb'd, &amp;c.] C. Caesar sucensens,
propter curam verrendis viis non adhibitam, Luto jussit appleri
congesto per milites in praetexte sinum. Sueton. in Vespas. C.5.</p>

<h3 id="id00318" style="margin-top: 3em">PART II</h3>

<h4 id="id00319" style="margin-top: 2em">CANTO III.</h4>

<h4 id="id00320" style="margin-top: 2em">THE ARGUMENT</h4>

<p id="id00321">————————————————————————-<br/>

The Knight, with various Doubts possest,<br/>

To win the Lady goes in quest<br/>

Of Sidrophel, the Rosy-Crucian,<br/>

To know the Dest'nies' Resolution;<br/>

With whom being met, they both chop Logick<br/>

About the Science Astrologick,<br/>

Till falling from Dispute to Fight,<br/>

The Conj'rer's worsted by the Knight.<br/>

————————————————————————-<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00322" style="margin-top: 2em">Doubtless the pleasure is as great<br/>

Of being cheated as to cheat;<br/>

As lookers-on feel most delight,<br/>

That least perceive a jugler's slight;<br/>

And still the less they understand,                             5<br/>

The more th' admire his slight of hand.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00323">Some with a noise, and greasy light,<br/>

Are snapt, as men catch larks by night;<br/>

Ensnar'd and hamper'd by the soul,<br/>

As nooses by their legs catch fowl                             l0<br/>

Some with a med'cine, and receipt,<br/>

Are  drawn to nibble at the bait;<br/>

And tho' it be a two-foot trout,<br/>

'Tis with a single hair pull'd out.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00324">Others believe no voice t' an organ                            15<br/>

So sweet as lawyer's in his bar-gown,<br/>

Until with subtle cobweb-cheats<br/>

Th'are catch'd in knotted law, like nets;<br/>

In which, when once they are imbrangled,<br/>

The more they stir, the more they're tangled;                  20<br/>

And while their purses can dispute,<br/>

There's no end of th' immortal suit.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00325">Others still gape t' anticipate<br/>

The cabinet-designs of fate;<br/>

Apply to wizards, to foresee                                   25<br/>

What shall and what shall never be;<br/>

And, as those vultures do forebode,<br/>

Believe events prove bad or good:<br/>

A flam more senseless than the roguery<br/>

Of old aruspicy and aug'ry.                                    30<br/>

That out of garbages of cattle<br/>

Presag'd th' events of truce or battle;<br/>

From flight of birds, or chickens pecking,<br/>

Success of great'st attempts would reckon:<br/>

Though cheats, yet more intelligible                           35<br/>

Than those that with the stars do fribble.<br/>

This HUDIBRAS by proof found true,<br/>

As in due time and place we'll shew:<br/>

For he, with beard and face made clean,<br/>

B'ing mounted on his steed agen,                               40<br/>

(And RALPHO got a cock-horse too<br/>

Upon his beast, with much ado)<br/>

Advanc'd on for the Widow's house,<br/>

To acquit himself, and pay his vows;<br/>

When various thoughts began to bustle,                         45<br/>

And with his inward man to justle<br/>

He thought what danger might accrue<br/>

If she should find he swore untrue;<br/>

Or if his squire or he should fail,<br/>

And not be punctual in their tale:                             50<br/>

It might at once the ruin prove<br/>

Both of his honour, faith, and love.<br/>

But if he should forbear to go,<br/>

She might conclude h'had broke his vow;<br/>

And that he durst not now for-shame                            55<br/>

Appear in court to try his claim.<br/>

This was the pen'worth of his thought,<br/>

To pass time and uneasy trot.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00326">Quoth he, In all my past adventures<br/>

I ne'er was set so on the tenters;                             60<br/>

Or taken tardy with dilemma,<br/>

That ev'ry way I turn does hem me,<br/>

And with inextricable doubt<br/>

Besets my puzzled wits about:<br/>

For tho' the dame has been my bail,                            65<br/>

To free me from enchanted jail,<br/>

Yet as a dog, committed close<br/>

For some offence, by chance breaks loose,<br/>

And quits his clog, but all in vain,<br/>

He still draws after him his chain;                            70<br/>

So, though my ankle she has quitted,<br/>

My heart continues still committed;<br/>

And like a bail'd and main-priz'd lover,<br/>

Altho' at large, I am bound over;<br/>

And when I shall appear in court,                              75<br/>

To plead my cause, and answer for't,<br/>

Unless the judge do partial prove,<br/>

What will become of me and love?<br/>

For if in our account we vary,<br/>

Or but in circumstance miscarry;                               80<br/>

Or if she put me to strict proof,<br/>

And make me pull my doublet off,<br/>

To shew, by evident record<br/>

Writ on my skin, I've kept my Word;<br/>

How can I e'er expect to have her,                             85<br/>

Having demurr'd onto her favour?<br/>

But faith, and love, and honour lost,.<br/>

Shall be reduc'd t' a Knight o' th' Post.<br/>

Beside, that stripping may prevent<br/>

What I'm to prove by argument,                                 90<br/>

And justify I have a tail<br/>

And that way, too, my proof may fail.<br/>

Oh that I cou'd enucleate,<br/>

And solve the problems of my fate<br/>

Or find, by necromantick art,                                  95<br/>

How far the dest'nies take my part<br/>

For if I were not more than certain<br/>

To win and wear her, and her fortune,<br/>

I'd go no farther in his courtship,<br/>

To hazard soul, estate, and worship                           100<br/>

For though an oath obliges not<br/>

Where any thing is to be got,<br/>

(As thou last prov'd) yet 'tis profane,<br/>

And sinful, when men swear in vain.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00327">Quoth RALPH, Not far from hence doth dwell                    105<br/>

A cunning man, hight SIDROPHEL,<br/>

That deals in destiny's dark counsels,<br/>

And sage opinions of the Moon sells;<br/>

To whom all people, far and near,<br/>

On deep importances repair;                                   110<br/>

When brass and pewter hap to stray,<br/>

And linen slinks out of the way;<br/>

When geese and pullen are seduc'd,<br/>

And sows of sucking-pigs are chows'd;<br/>

When cattle feel indisposition,                               115<br/>

And need th' opinion of physician;<br/>

When murrain reigns in hogs or sheep.<br/>

And chickens languish of the pip;<br/>

When yeast and outward means do fail,<br/>

And have no pow'r to work on ale:                             120<br/>

When butter does refuse to come,<br/>

And love proves cross and humoursome:<br/>

To him with questions, and with urine,<br/>

They for discov'ry flock, or curing.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00328">Quoth HUDIBRAS, This SIDROPHEL                                125<br/>

I've heard of, and should like it well,<br/>

If thou canst prove the Saints have freedom<br/>

To go to Sorc'rers when they need 'em.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00329">Says RALPHO, There's no doubt of that<br/>

Whose principles I quoted late,                               130<br/>

Prove that the Godly may alledge<br/>

For any thing their Privilege;<br/>

And to the Dev'l himself may go,<br/>

If they have motives thereunto.<br/>

For, as there is a war between                                135<br/>

The Dev'l and them, it is no sin,<br/>

If they by subtle stratagem<br/>

Make use of him, as he does them.<br/>

Has not this present Parliament<br/>

A &lt;w&gt; Ledger to the Devil sent,                               140<br/>

Fully impowr'd to treat about<br/>

Finding revolted witches out<br/>

And has not he, within a year,<br/>

Hang'd threescore of 'em in one shire?<br/>

Some only for not being drown'd,                              145<br/>

And some for sitting above ground,<br/>

Whole days and nights, upon their breeches,<br/>

And feeling pain, were hang'd for witches.<br/>

And some for putting knavish tricks<br/>

Upon green geese and turky-chicks,                            150<br/>

And pigs, that suddenly deceast<br/>

Of griefs unnat'ral, as he guest;<br/>

Who after prov'd himself a witch<br/>

And made a rod for his own breech.<br/>

Did not the Devil appear to MARTIN                            155<br/>

LUTHER in Germany for certain;<br/>

And wou'd have gull'd him with a trick,<br/>

But Martin was too politick?<br/>

Did he not help the &lt;x&gt; Dutch to purge<br/>

At ANTWERP their Cathedral Church?                            160<br/>

&lt;y&gt; Sing catches to the Saints at MASCON,<br/>

And tell them all they came to ask him<br/>

&lt;z&gt; Appear'd in divers shapes to KELLY,<br/>

And speak i' th' Nun of LOUDON's belly?<br/>

&lt;a&gt; Meet with the Parliament's Committee                      165<br/>

At WOODSTOCK on a pers'nal treaty?<br/>

&lt;b&gt; At SARUM take a cavalier<br/>

I' th' Cause's service prisoner<br/>

As WITHERS, in immortal rhime,<br/>

Has register'd to after-time!                                 170<br/>

Do not nor great Reformers use<br/>

This SIDROPHEL to forebode news?<br/>

To write of victories next year,<br/>

And castles taken yet i' th' air<br/>

Of battles fought at sea, and ships                           175<br/>

Sank two years hence, the last eclipse?<br/>

A total overthrow giv'n the King<br/>

In Cornwall, horse and foot, next Spring!<br/>

And has not he point-blank foretold<br/>

Whats'e'er the Close Committee would?                         180<br/>

Made Mars and Saturn for the Cause<br/>

The moon for Fundamental Laws?<br/>

The Ram, the Bull, and Goat declare<br/>

Against the Book of Common-Pray'r?<br/>

The Scorpion take the Protestation,                           185<br/>

And Bear engage for Reformation?<br/>

Made all the Royal Stars recant,<br/>

Compound and take the Covenant?<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00330">Quoth HUDIBRAS, The case is clear,<br/>

The Saints may 'mploy a Conjurer,                             190<br/>

As thou hast prov'd it by their practice;<br/>

No argument like matter of fact is;<br/>

And we are best of all led to<br/>

Men's principles by what they do.<br/>

Then let us straight advance in quest                         195<br/>

Of this profound Gymnosophist<br/>

And as the Fates and he advise,<br/>

Pursue or wave this enterprise,<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00331">This said, he turn'd about his steed,<br/>

And eftsoons on th' adventure rid;                            200<br/>

Where leave we him and RALPH a while,<br/>

And to the Conjurer turn our stile,<br/>

To let our reader understand<br/>

What's useful of him before-hand.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00332">He had been long t'wards mathematicks,                        205<br/>

Optics, philosophy, and staticks,<br/>

Magick, horoscopy, astrology,<br/>

And was old dog at physiology<br/>

But as a dog that turns the spit<br/>

Bestirs himself, and plies his feet,                          210<br/>

To climb the wheel, but all in vain,<br/>

His own weight brings him down again,<br/>

And still he's in the self-same place<br/>

Where at his setting out h was<br/>

So in the circle of the arts                                  215<br/>

Did he advance his nat'ral parts,<br/>

Till falling back still, for retreat,<br/>

He fell to juggle, cant, and cheat:<br/>

For as those fowls that live in water<br/>

Are never wet, he did but smatter:                            220<br/>

Whate'er he labour'd to appear,<br/>

His understanding still was clear<br/>

Yet none a deeper knowledge boasted,<br/>

Since old &lt;c&gt; HODGE-BACON and BOB GROSTED.<br/>

Th' Intelligible World he knew,                               225<br/>

And all men dream on't to be true;<br/>

That in this world there's not a wart<br/>

That has not there a counterpart;<br/>

Nor can there on the face of ground<br/>

An individual beard be found,                                 230<br/>

That has not, in that foreign nation,<br/>

A fellow of the self-same fashion<br/>

So cut, so colour'd, and so curl'd,<br/>

As those are in th' Inferior World.<br/>

H' had read DEE's Prefaces before,                            235<br/>

The DEV'L, and EUCLID, o'er and o'er;<br/>

And all the intrigues 'twixt him and KELLY,<br/>

LESCUS and th' EMPEROR, wou'd tell ye;<br/>

But with the Moon was more familiar<br/>

Than e'er was almanack well-willer;                           240<br/>

Her secrets understood so clear,<br/>

That some believ'd he had been there;<br/>

Knew when she was in the fittest mood<br/>

For cutting corns, or letting blood;<br/>

When for anointing scabs or itches,                           245<br/>

Or to the bum applying leeches;<br/>

When sows and bitches may be spay'd,<br/>

And in what sign best cyder's made:<br/>

Whether the wane be, or increase,<br/>

Best to set garlick, or sow pease:                            250<br/>

Who first found out the Man i' th' Moon,<br/>

That to the ancients was unknown;<br/>

How many dukes, and earls, and peers,<br/>

Are in the planetary spheres;<br/>

Their airy empire and command,                                255<br/>

Their sev'ral strengths by sea and land;<br/>

What factions th' have, and what they drive at<br/>

In public vogue, or what in private;<br/>

With what designs and interests<br/>

Each party manages contests.                                  260<br/>

He made an instrument to know<br/>

If the Moon shine at full or no;<br/>

That wou'd as soon as e'er she shone, straight<br/>

Whether 'twere day or night demonstrate;<br/>

Tell what her d'meter t' an inch is,                          265<br/>

And prove that she's not made of green cheese.<br/>

It wou'd demonstrate, that the Man in<br/>

The Moon's a Sea Mediterranean;<br/>

And that it is no dog nor bitch,<br/>

That stands behind him at his breech,                         270<br/>

But a huge Caspian Sea, or lake,<br/>

With arms, which men for legs mistake;<br/>

How large a gulph his tail composes,<br/>

And what a goodly bay his nose is;<br/>

How many German leagues by th' scale                          275<br/>

Cape Snout's from Promontory Tail.<br/>

He made a planetary gin,<br/>

Which rats would run their own heads in,<br/>

And cause on purpose to be taken,<br/>

Without th' expence of cheese or bacon.                       280<br/>

With lute-strings he would counterfeit<br/>

Maggots that crawl on dish of meat:<br/>

Quote moles and spots on any place<br/>

O' th' body, by the index face:<br/>

Detect lost maiden-heads by sneezing,                         285<br/>

Or breaking wind of dames, or pissing;<br/>

Cure warts and corns with application<br/>

Of med'cines to th' imagination;<br/>

Fright agues into dogs, and scare<br/>

With rhimes the tooth-ach and catarrh;                        290<br/>

Chace evil spirits away by dint<br/>

Of cickle, horse-shoe, hollow-flint;<br/>

Spit fire out of a walnut-shell,<br/>

Which made the Roman slaves rebel;<br/>

And fire a mine in China here                                 295<br/>

With sympathetic gunpowder.<br/>

He knew whats'ever's to be known,<br/>

But much more than he knew would own;<br/>

What med'cine 'twas that PARACELSUS<br/>

Could make a man with, as he tells us;                        300<br/>

What figur'd slates are best to make<br/>

On watry surface duck or drake;<br/>

What bowling-stones, in running race<br/>

Upon a board, have swiftest pace;<br/>

Whether a pulse beat in the black                             305<br/>

List of a dappled louse's back;<br/>

If systole or diastole move<br/>

Quickest when he's in wrath or love<br/>

When two of them do run a race,<br/>

Whether they gallop, trot, or pace:                           310<br/>

How many scores a flea will jump,<br/>

Of his own length, from head to rump;<br/>

Which &lt;d&gt; SOCRATES and CHAEREPHON,<br/>

In vain, assay'd so long agon;<br/>

Whether his snout a perfect nose is,                          315<br/>

And not an elephant's proboscis<br/>

How many diff'rent specieses<br/>

Of maggots breed in rotten cheese<br/>

And which are next of kin to those<br/>

Engender'd in a chandler's nose;                              320<br/>

Or those not seen, but understood,<br/>

That live in vinegar and wood.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00333">A paultry wretch he had, half-starv'd,<br/>

That him in place of Zany serv'd.<br/>

Hight WHACHUM, bred to dash and draw,                         325<br/>

Not wine, but more unwholesome law<br/>

To make 'twixt words and lines huge gaps,<br/>

Wide as meridians in maps;<br/>

To squander paper, and spare ink,<br/>

And cheat men of their words, some think.                     330<br/>

From this, by merited degrees,<br/>

He'd to more high advancement rise;<br/>

To be an under-conjurer,<br/>

A journeyman astrologer.<br/>

His business was to pump and wheedle,                         335<br/>

And men with their own keys unriddle;<br/>

And make them to themselves give answers,<br/>

For which they pay the necromancers;<br/>

To fetch and carry intelligence,<br/>

Of whom, and what, and where, and whence,                     340<br/>

And all discoveries disperse<br/>

Among th' whole pack of conjurers<br/>

What cut-purses have left with them<br/>

For the right owners to redeem;<br/>

And what they dare not vent find out,                         345<br/>

To gain themselves and th' art repute;<br/>

Draw figures, schemes, and horoscopes,<br/>

Of Newgate, Bridewell, brokers' shops,<br/>

Of thieves ascendant in the cart;<br/>

And find out all by rules of art;                             350<br/>

Which way a serving-man, that's run<br/>

With cloaths or money away, is gone:<br/>

Who pick'd a fob at holding forth;<br/>

And where a watch, for half the worth,<br/>

May be redeem'd; or stolen plate                              355<br/>

Restor'd at conscionable rate.<br/>

Beside all this, he serv'd his master<br/>

In quality of poetaster;<br/>

And rhimes appropriate could make<br/>

To ev'ry month i' th almanack                                 360<br/>

What terms begin and end could tell,<br/>

With their returns, in doggerel;<br/>

When the exchequer opes and shuts,<br/>

And sowgelder with safety cuts<br/>

When men may eat and drink their fill,                        365<br/>

And when be temp'rate, if they will;<br/>

When use and when abstain from vice,<br/>

Figs, grapes, phlebotomy, and spice.<br/>

And as in prison mean rogues beat<br/>

Hemp for the service of the great,                            370<br/>

So WHACHUM beats his dirty brains,<br/>

T' advance his master's fame and gains<br/>

And, like the Devil's oracles,<br/>

Put into doggrel rhimes his spells,<br/>

Which, over ev'ry month's blank page                          375<br/>

I' th' almanack, strange bilks presage.<br/>

He would an elegy compose<br/>

On maggots squeez'd out of his nose;<br/>

In lyrick numbers write an ode on<br/>

His mistress, eating a black-pudden:                          380<br/>

And when imprison'd air escap'd her,<br/>

It puft him with poetic rapture.<br/>

His sonnets charm'd th' attentive crowd,<br/>

By wide-mouth'd mortal troll'd aloud,<br/>

That 'circl'd with his long-ear'd guests,                     385<br/>

Like ORPHEUS look'd among the beasts.<br/>

A carman's horse could not pass by,<br/>

But stood ty'd up to poetry:<br/>

No porter's burthen pass'd along,<br/>

But serv'd for burthen to his song:                           390<br/>

Each window like a pill'ry appears,<br/>

With heads thrust through, nail'd by the ears<br/>

All trades run in as to the sight<br/>

Of monsters, or their dear delight<br/>

The gallow tree, when cutting purse                           395<br/>

Breeds bus'ness for heroic verse,<br/>

Which none does hear, but would have hung<br/>

T' have been the theme of such a song.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00334">Those two together long had liv'd,<br/>

In mansion prudently contriv'd;                               400<br/>

Where neither tree nor house could bar<br/>

The free detection of a star<br/>

And nigh an ancient obelisk<br/>

&lt;e&gt; Was rais'd by him, found out by FISK,<br/>

On which was a written not in words,                          405<br/>

But hieroglyphic mute of birds,<br/>

Many rare pithy saws concerning<br/>

The worth of astrologic learning.<br/>

From top of this there hung a rope,<br/>

To a which he fasten'd telescope;                             410<br/>

The spectacles with which the stars<br/>

He reads in smallest characters.<br/>

It happen'd as a boy, one night,<br/>

Did fly his tarsel of a kite,<br/>

The strangest long-wing'd hawk that flies,                    415<br/>

That, like a bird of Paradise,<br/>

Or herald's martlet, has no legs,<br/>

Nor hatches young ones, nor lays eggs;<br/>

His train was six yards long, milk-white,<br/>

At th' end of which there hung a light,                       420<br/>

Inclos'd in lanthorn, made of paper,<br/>

That far off like a star did appear.<br/>

This SIDROPHEL by chance espy'd,<br/>

And with amazement staring wide,<br/>

Bless us! quoth he, what dreadful wonder                      425<br/>

Is that appears in heaven yonder?<br/>

A comet, and without a beard!<br/>

Or star that ne'er before appear'd!<br/>

I'm certain 'tis not in the scrowl<br/>

Of all those beasts, and fish, and fowl,                      430<br/>

With which, like Indian plantations,<br/>

The learned stock the constellations<br/>

Nor those that draw for signs have bin<br/>

To th' houses where the planets inn.<br/>

It must be supernatural,                                      435<br/>

&lt;e&gt; Unless it be that cannon-ball<br/>

That, shot i' th' air point-blank upright,<br/>

Was borne to that prodigious height,<br/>

That learn'd Philosophers maintain,<br/>

It ne'er came backwards down again;                           440<br/>

But in the airy region yet<br/>

Hangs like the body of MAHOMET<br/>

For if it be above the shade<br/>

That by the earth's round bulk is made,<br/>

'Tis probable it may from far                                 445<br/>

Appear no bullet, but a star.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00335">This said, he to his engine flew,<br/>

Plac'd near at hand, in open view,<br/>

And rais'd it 'till it levell'd right<br/>

Against the glow-worm tail of kite,                           450<br/>

Then peeping thro', Bless us! (quoth he)<br/>

It is a planet, now I see<br/>

And, if I err not, by his proper<br/>

Figure, that's like tobacco-stopper,<br/>

It should be Saturn. Yes, 'tis clear                          455<br/>

'Tis Saturn; but what makes him there?<br/>

He's got between the Dragon's Tail<br/>

And farther Leg behind o' th' Whale.<br/>

Pray heav'n divert the fatal omen,<br/>

For 'tis a prodigy not common;                                460<br/>

And can no less than the world's end,<br/>

Or Nature's funeral, portend.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00336">With that he fell again to pry.<br/>

Thro' perspective more wistfully,<br/>

When by mischance the fatal string,                           465<br/>

That kept the tow'ring fowl on wing,<br/>

Breaking, down fell the star. Well shot,<br/>

Quoth WHACHUM, who right wisely thought<br/>

H' had levell'd at a star, and hit it<br/>

But SIDROPHEL, more subtle-witted,                            470<br/>

Cry'd out, What horrible and fearful<br/>

Portent is this, to see a star fall?<br/>

It threatens nature, and the doom<br/>

Will not be long before it come<br/>

When stars do fail, 'tis plain enough,                        475<br/>

The day of judgment's not far off;<br/>

&lt;f&gt; As lately 'twas reveal'd to SEDGWICK,<br/>

And some of us find out by magick.<br/>

Then since the time we have to live<br/>

In this world's shorten'd, let us strive                      480<br/>

To make our best advantage of it,<br/>

And pay our losses with our profit.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00337">This feat fell out not long before<br/>

The Knight, upon the forenam'd score,<br/>

In quest of SIDROPHEL advancing,                              485<br/>

Was now in prospect of the mansion<br/>

Whom he discov'ring, turn'd his glass,<br/>

And found far off, 'twas HUDIBRAS.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00338">WHACHUM, (quoth he), look yonder, some<br/>

To try or use our art are come                                490<br/>

The one's the learned Knight: seek out,<br/>

And pump 'em what they come about.<br/>

WHACHUM advanc'd, with all submissness,<br/>

T' accost em, but much more their bus'ness.<br/>

He held a stirrup, while the Knight                           495<br/>

From leathern bare-bones did alight<br/>

And taking from his hand the bridle,<br/>

Approach'd the dark Squire to unriddle.<br/>

He gave him first the time o' th' day,<br/>

And welcom'd him, as he might say:                            500<br/>

He ask'd him whence he came, and whither<br/>

Their bus'ness lay? Quoth RALPHO, Hither.<br/>

Did you not lose? Quoth RALPHO, Nay.<br/>

Quoth WHACHUM, Sir, I meant your way!<br/>

Your Knight — Quoth RALPHO, Is a lover,                      505<br/>

And pains intolerable doth suffer:<br/>

For lovers' hearts are not their own hearts,<br/>

Nor lights, nor lungs, and so forth downwards.<br/>

What time, (quoth RALPHO), Sir? — Too long<br/>

Three years it off and on has hung. —                        510<br/>

Quoth he, I meant what time o'the day 'tis. —<br/>

Quoth RALPHO, Between seven and eight 'tis.<br/>

Why then, (quoth Whachum) my small art<br/>

Tells me, the dame has a hard heart,<br/>

Or great estate. — Quoth RALPH, A jointer,                   515<br/>

Which makes him have so hot a mind t'her.<br/>

Mean while the Knight was making water,<br/>

Before he fell upon the matter;<br/>

Which having done, the Wizard steps in,<br/>

To give him suitable reception                                520<br/>

But kept his bus'ness at a bay<br/>

Till WHACHUM put him in the way;<br/>

Who having now, by RALPHO's light.<br/>

Expounded th' errand of the Knight,<br/>

And what he came to know, drew near,                          525<br/>

To whisper in the Conj'rer's ear,<br/>

Which he prevented thus: What was't,<br/>

Quoth he, that I was saying last,<br/>

Before these gentlemen arriv'd?<br/>

Quoth WHACHUM, Venus you retriev'd,                           530<br/>

In opposition with Mars,<br/>

And no benigne friendly stars<br/>

T' allay the effect. — Quoth Wizard, So<br/>

In Virgo? Ha! — Quoth WHACHUM, No.<br/>

Has Saturn nothing to do in it?                               535<br/>

One-tenth of's circle to a minute.<br/>

'Tis well, quoth he. — Sir, you'll excuse<br/>

This rudeness I am forc'd to use<br/>

It is a scheme and face of Heaven,<br/>

As the aspects are dispos'd this even,                        540<br/>

I was contemplating upon<br/>

When you arriv'd; but now I've done,<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00339">Quoth HUDIBRAS, If I appear<br/>

Unseasonable in coming here<br/>

At such a tone, to interrupt,                                 545<br/>

Your speculations, which I hop'd<br/>

Assistance from, and come to use,<br/>

'T is fit that I ask your excuse.<br/>

By no means, Sir, quoth SIDROPHEL;<br/>

The stars your coming did foretel:                            550<br/>

I did expect you here, and knew,<br/>

Before you spake, your bus'ness too.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00340">Quoth HUDIBRAS, Make that appear,<br/>

And I shall credit whatsoe'er<br/>

You tell me after on your word,                               555<br/>

Howe'er unlikely, or absurd.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00341">You are in love, Sir, with a widow,<br/>

Quoth he, that does not greatly heed you,<br/>

And for three years has rid your wit<br/>

And passion without drawing bit:                              560<br/>

And now your bus'ness is to know,<br/>

If you shall carry her or no.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00342">Quoth HUDIBRAS, You're in the right;<br/>

But how the Devil you came by't<br/>

I can't imagine; for the Stars,                               565<br/>

I'm sure, can tell no more than a horse;<br/>

Nor can their aspects (though you pore<br/>

Your eyes out on 'em) tell you more<br/>

Than th' oracle of sieve and sheers,<br/>

That turns as certain as the spheres:                         570<br/>

But if the Devil's of your counsel,<br/>

Much may be done my noble Donzel;<br/>

And 'tis on his account I come,<br/>

To know from you my fatal doom.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00343">Quoth SIDROPHEL, If you Suppose,                              575<br/>

Sir Knight, that I am one of those,<br/>

I might suspect, and take the alarm,<br/>

Your bus'ness is but to inform;<br/>

But if it be, 'tis ne'er the near;<br/>

You have a wrong sow by the ear;                              580<br/>

For I assure you, for my part,<br/>

I only deal by rules of art,<br/>

Such as are lawful, and judge by<br/>

Conclusions of Astrology:<br/>

But for the Dev'l, know nothing by him;                       585<br/>

But only this, that I defy him.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00344">Quoth he, Whatever others deem ye,<br/>

I understand your metonymy:<br/>

Your words of second-hand intention,<br/>

When things by wrongful names you mention;                    590<br/>

The mystick sense of all your terms,<br/>

That are, indeed, but magick charms<br/>

To raise the Devil, and mean one thing,<br/>

And that is down-right conjuring;<br/>

And in itself more warrantable,                               595<br/>

Than cheat, or canting to a rabble,<br/>

Or putting tricks upon the Moon,<br/>

Which by confed'racy are done.<br/>

Your ancient conjurers were wont<br/>

To make her from her sphere dismount.                         600<br/>

And to their incantations stoop:<br/>

They scorn'd to pore thro' telescope,<br/>

Or idly play at bo-peep with her,<br/>

To find out cloudy or fair weather,<br/>

Which ev'ry almanack can tell,                                605<br/>

Perhaps, as learnedly and well,<br/>

As you yourself — Then, friend, I doubt<br/>

You go the furthest way about.<br/>

&lt;g&gt; Your modern Indian magician<br/>

Makes but a hole in th' earth to piss in,                     610<br/>

And straight resolves all questions by't,<br/>

And seldom fails to be i'th' right.<br/>

The Rosy-Crucian way's more sure<br/>

To bring the Devil to the lure;<br/>

Each of 'em has a sev'ral gin                                 615<br/>

To catch intelligences in.<br/>

Some by the nose with fumes trepan 'em,<br/>

As DUNSTAN did the Devil's grannam;<br/>

Others, with characters and words,<br/>

Catch 'em, as men in nets do birds;                           620<br/>

And some with symbols, signs, and tricks,<br/>

Engrav'd with planetary nicks,<br/>

With their own influences will fetch 'em<br/>

Down from their orbs, arrest, and catch 'em;<br/>

Make 'em depose and answer to                                 625<br/>

All questions e're they let them go.<br/>

 &lt;h&gt; BUMBASTUS kept a Devil's bird<br/>

Shut in the pummel of his sword,<br/>

That taught him all the cunning pranks<br/>

Of past and future mountebanks.                               630<br/>

KELLY did all his feats upon<br/>

The Devil's looking-glass, a stone;<br/>

Where playing with him at bo-peep,<br/>

He solv'd all problems ne'er so deep.<br/>

&lt;i&gt; AGRIPPA kept a Stygian pug,                               635<br/>

I' th' garb and habit of a dog,<br/>

That was his tutor, and the cur<br/>

Read to th' occult philosopher,<br/>

And taught him subt'ly to maintain<br/>

All other sciences are vain.                                  640<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00345">To this, quoth SIDROPHELLO, Sir,<br/>

AGRIPPA was no conjurer,<br/>

Nor PARACELSUS, no, nor BEHMEN;<br/>

Nor was the dog a Cacodaemon,<br/>

But a true dog, that would shew tricks                        645<br/>

For th' emperor, and leap o'er sticks;<br/>

Would fetch and carry; was more civil<br/>

Than other dogs, but yet no Devil;<br/>

And whatsoe'er he's said to do,<br/>

He went the self-same way we go.                              650<br/>

As for the Rosy-Cross Philosophers,<br/>

Whom you will have to be but sorcerers,<br/>

What they pretend to is no more,<br/>

Than TRISMEGISTUS did before,<br/>

PYTHAGORAS, old ZOROASTER,                                    655<br/>

And APOLLONIUS their master;<br/>

To whom they do confess they owe<br/>

All that they do, and all they know.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00346">Quoth HUDIBRAS, Alas! what is't t' us,<br/>

Whether 'twas said by TRISMEGISTUS,                           660<br/>

If it be nonsense, false, or mystick,<br/>

Or not intelligible, or sophistick?<br/>

'Tis not antiquity, nor author,<br/>

That makes Truth Truth, altho' Times daughter;<br/>

'Twas he that put her in the pit                              665<br/>

Before he pull'd her out of it;<br/>

And as he eats his sons, just so<br/>

He feeds upon his daughters too.<br/>

Nor does it follow, 'cause a herald,<br/>

Can make a gentleman, scarce a year old,                      670<br/>

To be descended of a race<br/>

Of ancient kings in a small space,<br/>

That we should all opinions hold<br/>

Authentic that we can make old.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00347">Quoth SIDROPHEL, It is no part                                675<br/>

Of prudence to cry down an art,<br/>

And what it may perform deny,<br/>

Because you understand not why<br/>

(As &lt;k&gt; AVERHOIS play'd but a mean trick<br/>

To damn our whole art for eccentrick:)                        680<br/>

For Who knows all that knowledge contains<br/>

Men dwell not on the tops of mountains,<br/>

But on their sides, or rising's seat<br/>

So 'tis with knowledge's vast height.<br/>

Do not the hist'ries of all ages                              685<br/>

Relate miraculous presages,<br/>

Of strange turns in the world's affairs,<br/>

Foreseen b' Astrologers, Soothsayers,<br/>

Chaldeans, learn'd Genethliacks,<br/>

And some that have writ almanacks?                            690<br/>

&lt;l&gt; The MEDIA N emp'ror dreamt his daughter<br/>

Had pist all ASIA under water,<br/>

And that a vine, sprung from her haunches,<br/>

O'erspread his empire with its branches:<br/>

And did not soothsayers expound it,                           695<br/>

As after by th' event he found it?<br/>

&lt;m&gt; When CAESAR  in the senate fell,<br/>

Did not the sun eclips'd foretel,<br/>

And, in resentment of his slaughter,<br/>

Look'd pale for almost a year after?                          700<br/>

&lt;n&gt; AUGUSTUS having, b' oversight,<br/>

Put on his left shoe 'fore his right,<br/>

Had like to have been slain that day<br/>

By soldiers mutin'ing for pay.<br/>

Are there not myriads of this sort,                           705<br/>

Which stories of all times report?<br/>

Is it not ominous in all countries<br/>

When crows and ravens croak upon trees?<br/>

&lt;o&gt; The Roman senate, when within<br/>

The city walls an owl was seen                                710<br/>

Did cause their clergy, with lustrations,<br/>

(Our Synod calls humiliations),<br/>

The round-fac'd prodigy t'avert<br/>

From doing town or country hurt<br/>

And if an owl have so much pow'r,                             715<br/>

Why should not planets have much more,<br/>

That in a region far above<br/>

Inferior fowls of the air move,<br/>

And should see further, and foreknow<br/>

More than their augury below?                                 720<br/>

Though that once serv'd the polity<br/>

Of mighty states to govern by<br/>

And this is what we take in hand<br/>

By pow'rful art to understand<br/>

Which, how we have perform'd, all ages                        725<br/>

Can speak th' events of our presages<br/>

Have we not lately, in the Moon,<br/>

Found a New World, to the Old unknown?<br/>

Discover'd sea and land, COLUMBUS<br/>

And MAGELLAN cou'd never compass?                             730<br/>

Made mountains with our tubes appear,<br/>

And cattle grazing on 'em there?<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00348">Quoth HUDIBRAS, You lie so ope,<br/>

That I, without a telescope,<br/>

Can mind your tricks out, and descry                          735<br/>

Where you tell truth, and where you lye:<br/>

For &lt;p&gt; ANAXAGORAS, long agon,<br/>

Saw hills, as well as you, i' th' Moon;<br/>

And held the Sun was but a piece<br/>

Of red-hot ir'n, as big as Greece;                            740<br/>

Believ'd the Heav'ns were made of stone,<br/>

Because the Sun had voided one;<br/>

And, rather than he would recant<br/>

Th' opinion, suffer'd banishment.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00349">But what, alas! is it to us,                                  745<br/>

Whether i' th' Moon men thus or thus<br/>

Do eat their Porridge, cut their corns,<br/>

Or whether they have tails or horns?<br/>

What trade from thence can you advance,<br/>

But what we nearer have from France?                          750<br/>

What can our travellers bring home,<br/>

That is not to be learnt at Rome?<br/>

What politicks, or strange opinions,<br/>

That are not in our own dominions?<br/>

What science can he brought from thence,                      755<br/>

In which we do not here commence?<br/>

What revelations, or religions,<br/>

That are not in our native regions?<br/>

Are sweating lanthorns, or screen-fans,<br/>

Made better there than th' are in France?                     760<br/>

Or do they teach to sing and play<br/>

O' th' gittar there a newer way?<br/>

Can they make plays there, that shall fit<br/>

The public humour, with less wit?<br/>

Write wittier dances, quainter shows,                         765<br/>

Or fight with more ingenious blows?<br/>

Or does the man i' th' moon look big,<br/>

And wear a huger perriwig,<br/>

Shew in his gait or face more tricks,<br/>

Than our own native lunaticks?                                770<br/>

And if w' out-do him here at home,<br/>

What good of your design can come?<br/>

As wind i' th' hypocondries pent,<br/>

Is but a blast if downward sent,<br/>

But if it upward chance to fly,                               775<br/>

Becomes new Light and Prophecy<br/>

So when your speculations tend<br/>

Above their just and useful end,<br/>

Although they promise strange and great<br/>

Discoveries of things far set,                                780<br/>

They are but idle dreams and fancies,<br/>

And savour strongly of the ganzas.<br/>

Tell me but what's the natural cause,<br/>

Why on a sign no painter draws<br/>

The full moon ever, but the half;                             785<br/>

Resolve that with your JACOB's staff;<br/>

Or why wolves raise a hubbub at her,<br/>

And dogs howl when she shines in water;<br/>

And I shall freely give my vote,<br/>

You may know something more remote.                           790<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00350">At this deep SIDROPHEL look'd wise,<br/>

And staring round with owl-like eyes,<br/>

He put his face into a posture<br/>

Of sapience, and began to bluster:<br/>

For having three times shook his head                         795<br/>

To stir his wit up, thus he said<br/>

Art has no mortal enemies,<br/>

Next ignorance, but owls and geese;<br/>

Those consecrated geese in orders,<br/>

That to the Capitol were warders;                             800<br/>

And being then upon patrol,<br/>

With noise alone beat off the Gaul:<br/>

Or those Athenian Sceptic owls,<br/>

That will not credit their own souls;<br/>

Or any science understand,                                    805<br/>

Beyond the reach of eye or hand;<br/>

But meas'ring all things by their own<br/>

Knowledge, hold nothing's to be known<br/>

Those wholesale criticks, that in coffee-<br/>

Houses cry down all philosophy,                               810<br/>

And will not know upon what ground<br/>

In nature we our doctrine found,<br/>

Altho' with pregnant evidence<br/>

We can demonstrate it to sense,<br/>

As I just now have done to you,                               815<br/>

Foretelling what you came to know.<br/>

Were the stars only made to light<br/>

Robbers and burglarers by night?<br/>

To wait on drunkards, thieves, gold-finders,<br/>

And lovers solacing behind doors,                             820<br/>

Or giving one another pledges<br/>

Of matrimony under hedges?<br/>

Or witches simpling, and on gibbets<br/>

Cutting from malefactors snippets?<br/>

Or from the pillory tips of ears                              825<br/>

Of Rebel-Saints and perjurers?<br/>

Only to stand by, and look on,<br/>

But not know what is said or done?<br/>

Is there a constellation there,<br/>

That was not born and bred up here?                           830<br/>

And therefore cannot be to learn<br/>

In any inferior concern.<br/>

Were they not, during all their lives,<br/>

Most of 'em pirates, whores and thieves;<br/>

And is it like they have not still                            835<br/>

In their old practices some skill<br/>

Is there a planet that by birth<br/>

Does not derive its house from earth?<br/>

And therefore probably must know,<br/>

What is and hath been done below.                             840<br/>

Who made the Balance, or whence came<br/>

The Bull, the Lion, and the Ram?<br/>

Did not we here the Argo rig,<br/>

Make BERENICE's periwig?<br/>

Whose liv'ry does the Coachman wear?                          845<br/>

Or who made Cassiopeia's chair?<br/>

And therefore, as they came from hence,<br/>

With us may hold intelligence.<br/>

PLATO deny'd the world can be<br/>

Govern'd without geometree,                                   850<br/>

(For money b'ing the common scale<br/>

Of things by measure, weight, and tale,<br/>

In all th' affairs of Church and State,<br/>

'Tis both the balance and the weight;)<br/>

Then much less can it be without                              855<br/>

Divine Astrology made out;<br/>

That puts the other down in worth,<br/>

As far as Heav'n's above the earth.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00351">These reasons (quoth the Knight) I grant<br/>

Are something more significant                                860<br/>

Than any that the learned use<br/>

Upon this subject to produce;<br/>

And yet th' are far from satisfactory,<br/>

T' establish and keep up your factory.<br/>

Th' Egyptians say, the Sun has twice                          865<br/>

Shifted his setting and his rise<br/>

Twice has he risen in the west,<br/>

As many times set in the east;<br/>

But whether that be true or no,<br/>

The Dev'l any of you know.                                    870<br/>

&lt;r&gt; Some hold the heavens like a top,<br/>

And kept by circulation. up;<br/>

And, were't not for their wheeling round,<br/>

They'd instantly fall to the ground:<br/>

As sage EMPEDOCLES of old,<br/>

And from him modern authors hold.                             875<br/>

&lt;s&gt; PLATO believ'd the Sun and Moon<br/>

Below all other Planets run.<br/>

Some MERCURY, some VENUS, seat<br/>

Above the Sun himself in height.<br/>

&lt;t&gt; The learned SCALIGER complain'd,                          880<br/>

Gainst what COPERNICUS maintain'd,<br/>

That, in twelve hundred years and odd,<br/>

The Sun had left its ancient road,<br/>

And nearer to time earth is come<br/>

'Bove fifty thousand miles from home:                         885<br/>

Swore 'twas a most notorious flam;<br/>

And he that had so little shame<br/>

To vent such fopperies abroad,<br/>

Deserv'd to have his rump well claw'd;<br/>

Which Monsieur BODIN hearing, swore                           890<br/>

That he deserv'd the rod much more,<br/>

That durst upon a truth give doom;<br/>

He knew less than the Pope of Rome.<br/>

&lt;u&gt; CARDAN believ'd great states depend<br/>

Upon the tip o' th' Bear's tail's end;                        895<br/>

That, as she whisk'd it t'wards the Sun,<br/>

Strow'd mighty empires up and down;<br/>

Which others say must needs be false,<br/>

Because your true bears have no tails.<br/>

Some say the Zodiack Constellations                           900<br/>

Have long since chang'd their antique stations<br/>

Above a sign, and prove the same<br/>

In Taurus now once in the Ram;<br/>

Affirm the trigons chop'd and chang'd,<br/>

The wat'ry with the fiery rang'd:                             905<br/>

Then how can their effects still hold<br/>

To be the same they were of old?<br/>

This, though the art were true, would make<br/>

Our modern soothsayers mistake:                               910<br/>

And in one cause they tell more lies,<br/>

In figures and nativities,<br/>

Than th' old &lt;w&gt; Chaldean conjurers<br/>

In so many hundred thousand years<br/>

Beside their nonsense in translating,                         915<br/>

For want of accidence and Latin,<br/>

Like Idus, and Calendae, Englisht<br/>

The quarter-days by skilful linguist;<br/>

And yet with canting, sleight and, cheat,<br/>

'Twill serve their turn to do the feat;                       920<br/>

Make fools believe in their foreseeing<br/>

Of things before they are in being<br/>

To swallow gudgeons ere th' are catch'd;<br/>

And count their chickens ere th' are hatch'd<br/>

Make them the constellations prompt,                          925<br/>

And give 'em back their own accompt<br/>

But still the best to him that gives<br/>

The best price for't, or best believes.<br/>

Some towns and cities, some, for brevity,<br/>

Have cast the ’versal world's nativity,                       930<br/>

And made the infant-stars confess,<br/>

Like fools or children, what they please.<br/>

Some calculate the hidden fates<br/>

Of monkeys, puppy-dogs, and cats<br/>

Some running-nags and fighting cocks,                         935<br/>

Some love, trade, law-suits, and the pox;<br/>

Some take a measure of the lives<br/>

Of fathers, mothers, husbands, wives;<br/>

Make opposition, trine, and quartile,<br/>

Tell who is barren, and who fertile;                          940<br/>

As if the planet's first aspect<br/>

The tender infant did infect<br/>

In soul and body, and instill<br/>

All future good, and future ill;<br/>

Which, in their dark fatalities lurking,                      945<br/>

At destin'd periods fall a working;<br/>

And break out, like the hidden seeds<br/>

Of long diseases, into deeds,<br/>

In friendships, enmities, and strife,<br/>

And all the emergencies of life.                              950<br/>

No sooner does he peep into<br/>

The world, but he has done his do;<br/>

Catch'd all diseases, took all physick<br/>

That cures or kills a man that is sick;<br/>

Marry'd his punctual dose of wives;                           955<br/>

Is cuckolded, and breaks or thrives.<br/>

There's but the twinkling of a star<br/>

Between a man of peace and war;<br/>

A thief and justice, fool and knave,<br/>

A huffing officer and a slave;                                960<br/>

A crafty lawyer and a pick-pocket,<br/>

A great philosopher and a blockhead;<br/>

A formal preacher and a player,<br/>

A learn'd physician and manslayer.<br/>

As if men from the stars did suck                             965<br/>

Old age, diseases, and ill-luck,<br/>

Wit, folly, honour, virtue, vice,<br/>

Trade, travel, women, claps, and dice;<br/>

And draw, with the first air they breathe,<br/>

Battle and murder, sudden death.                              970<br/>

Are not these fine commodities<br/>

To be imported from the skies,<br/>

And vended here amongst the rabble,<br/>

For staple goods and warrantable?<br/>

&lt;x&gt; Like money by the Druids borrow'd,                        975<br/>

In th' other world to be restor'd?<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00352">Quoth SIDROPHEL, To let you know<br/>

You wrong the art, and artists too,<br/>

Since arguments are lost on those<br/>

That do our principles oppose,                                980<br/>

I will (although I've done't before)<br/>

Demonstrate to your sense once more,<br/>

And draw a figure, that shall tell you<br/>

What you, perhaps, forget befel you,<br/>

By way of horary inspection,                                  985<br/>

Which some account our worst erection.<br/>

With that he circles draws, and squares,<br/>

With cyphers, astral characters;<br/>

Then looks 'em o'er, to und'erstand 'em,<br/>

Although set down hob-nab, at random.                         990<br/>

Quoth he, This scheme of th' heavens set,<br/>

Discovers how in fight you met<br/>

At Kingston with a may-pole idol,<br/>

And that y' were bang'd both back and side well;<br/>

And though you overcame the bear,                             995<br/>

The dogs beat you at Brentford fair;<br/>

Where sturdy butchers broke your noddle,<br/>

And handled you like a fop-doodle.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00353">Quoth HUDIBRAS, I now perceive<br/>

You are no conj'rer, by your leave;                          1000<br/>

That &lt;y&gt; paultry story is untrue,<br/>

And forg'd to cheat such gulls as you.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00354">Not true? quoth he; howe'er you vapour,<br/>

I can what I affirm make appear.<br/>

WHACHUM shall justify't t' your face,                        1005<br/>

And prove he was upon the place.<br/>

He play'd the Saltinbancho's part,<br/>

Transform'd t' a Frenchman by my art<br/>

He stole your cloak, and pick'd your pocket,<br/>

Chows'd and caldes'd ye like a blockhead:                    1010<br/>

And what you lost I can produce,<br/>

If you deny it, here i' th' house.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00355">Quoth HUDIBRAS, I do believe<br/>

That argument's demonstrative.<br/>

RALPHO, bear witness; and go fetch us                        1015<br/>

A constable to seize the wretches<br/>

For though th' are both false knaves and cheats,<br/>

Impostors, jugglers, counterfeits,<br/>

I'll make them serve for perpendiculars<br/>

As true as e'er were us'd by bricklayers.                    1020<br/>

They're guilty, by their own confessions,<br/>

Of felony, and at the sessions,<br/>

Upon the bench, I will so handle 'em,<br/>

That the &lt;z&gt; vibration of this pendulum<br/>

Shalt make all taylors yards of one                          1025<br/>

Unanimous opinion,<br/>

A thing he long has vapour'd of,<br/>

But now shall wake it out of proof.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00356">Quoth SIDROPHEL, I do not doubt<br/>

To find friends that will bear me out,                       1030<br/>

Nor have I hazarded my art,<br/>

And neck, so long on the state's part,<br/>

To be expos'd i' th' end to suffer<br/>

By such a braggadocio huffer.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00357">Huffer! quoth HUDIBRAS: this sword                           1035<br/>

Shall down thy false throat craw that word.<br/>

RALPHO, make haste, and call an officer,<br/>

To apprehend this Stygian sophister,<br/>

Meanwhile I'll hold 'em at a bay,<br/>

Lest he and WHACHUM run away.                                1040<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00358">But SIDROPHEL who, from the aspect<br/>

Of HUDIBRAS did now erect<br/>

A figure worse portenting far<br/>

Than that of a malignant star,<br/>

Believ'd it now the fittest moment                           1045<br/>

To shun the danger that might come on't,<br/>

While HUDIBRAS was all alone,<br/>

And he and WHACHUM, two to one.<br/>

This being resolv'd, he spy'd, by chance,<br/>

Behind the door, an iron lance,                              1050<br/>

That many a sturdy limb had gor'd,<br/>

And legs, and loins, and shoulders bor'd:<br/>

He snatch'd it up, and made a pass,<br/>

To make his way through HUDIBRAS.<br/>

WHACHUM had got a fire-fork,                                 1055<br/>

With which he vow'd to do his work.<br/>

But HUDIBRAS was well prepar'd,<br/>

And stoutly stood upon his guard:<br/>

He put by SIDROPHELLO'S thrust,<br/>

And in right manfully he rusht;                              l060<br/>

The weapon from his gripe he wrung,<br/>

And laid him on the earth along.<br/>

WHACHUM his sea-coal prong threw by,<br/>

And basely turn'd his back to fly<br/>

But HUDIBRAS gave him a twitch                               1065<br/>

As quick as light'ning in the breech,<br/>

Just in the place where honour's lodg'd,<br/>

As wise philosophers have judg'd;<br/>

Because a kick in that place more<br/>

Hurts honour than deep wounds before.                        1070<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00359">Quoth HUDIBRAS, The stars determine<br/>

You are my prisoners, base vermine!<br/>

Could they not tell you so as well<br/>

As what I came to know foretell?<br/>

By this what cheats you are we find,                         1075<br/>

That in your own concerns are blind.<br/>

Your lives are now at my dispose,<br/>

To be redeem'd by fine or blows:<br/>

But who his honour wou'd defile,<br/>

To take or sell two lives so vile?                           1080<br/>

I'll give you quarter; but your pillage,<br/>

The conq'ring warrior's crop and tillage,<br/>

Which with his sword he reaps and plows,<br/>

That's mine, the law of arms allows.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00360">This said, in haste, in haste he fell                        1085<br/>

To rummaging of SIDROPHEL.<br/>

First, he expounded both his pockets,<br/>

And found a watch, with rings and lockets,<br/>

Which had been left with him t' erect<br/>

A figure for, and so detect;                                 1090<br/>

A copper-plate, with almanacks<br/>

Engrav'd upon't; with other knacks,<br/>

Of BOOKER's LILLY's, SARAH JIMMERS',<br/>

And blank-schemes to discover nimmers;<br/>

A moon-dial, with Napier's bones,                            1095<br/>

And sev'ral constellation stones,<br/>

Engrav'd in planetary hours,<br/>

That over mortals had strange powers<br/>

To make 'em thrive in law or trade,<br/>

And stab or poison to evade;                                 1100<br/>

In wit or wisdom to improve,<br/>

And be victorious in love,<br/>

WHACHUM had neither cross nor pile;<br/>

His plunder was not worth the while;<br/>

All which the conq'rer did discompt,                         1105<br/>

To pay for curing of his rump.<br/>

But SIDROPHEL, as full of tricks<br/>

As Rota-men of politicks,<br/>

Straight cast about to over-reach<br/>

Th' unwary conqu'ror with a fetch,                           1110<br/>

And make him clad (at least) to quit<br/>

His victory, and fly the pit,<br/>

&lt;a&gt; Before the Secular Prince of Darkness<br/>

Arriv'd to seize upon his carcass?<br/>

And as a fox, with hot pursuit                               1115<br/>

Chac'd thro' a warren, casts about<br/>

To save his credit, and among<br/>

Dead vermin on a gallows hung,<br/>

And while the dogs run underneath,<br/>

Escap'd (by counterfeiting death)                            1120<br/>

Not out of cunning, but a train<br/>

Of atoms justling in his brain,<br/>

As learn'd philosophers give out,<br/>

So SIDROPHELLO cast about,<br/>

And fell to's wonted trade again,                            1125<br/>

To feign himself in earnest slain:<br/>

First stretch'd out one leg, than another,<br/>

And seeming in his breath to smother<br/>

A broken sigh; quoth he, Where am I,<br/>

Alive or dead? or which way came I,                          1130<br/>

Through so immense a space so soon<br/>

But now I thought myself in th' Moon<br/>

And that a monster with huge whiskers,<br/>

More formidable than a Switzer's,<br/>

My body through and through had drill'd,                     1135<br/>

And WHACHUM by my side had kill'd:<br/>

Had cross-examin'd both our hose,<br/>

And plunder'd all we had to lose.<br/>

Look, there he is; I see him now,<br/>

And feel the place I am run through:                         1140<br/>

And there lies WHACHUM by my side<br/>

Stone dead, and in his own blood dy'd.<br/>

Oh! Oh! with that he fetch'd a groan,<br/>

And fell again into a swoon;<br/>

Shut both his eyes, and stopp'd his breath,                  1145<br/>

And to the life out-acted death;<br/>

That HUDIBRAS, to all appearing,<br/>

Believ'd him to be dead as herring.<br/>

He held it now no longer safe<br/>

To tarry the return of RALPH,                                1150<br/>

But rather leave him in the lurch:<br/>

Thought he, he has abus'd our Church,<br/>

Refus'd to give himself one firk<br/>

To carry on the publick work;<br/>

Despis'd our Synod-men like dirt,                            1155<br/>

And made their discipline his sport;<br/>

Divulg'd the secrets of their classes,<br/>

And their conventions prov'd high places;<br/>

Disparag'd their tythe-pigs as Pagan,<br/>

And set at nought their cheese and bacon;                    1160<br/>

Rail'd at their Covenant, and jeer'd<br/>

Their rev'rend parsons to my beard:<br/>

For all which scandals, to be quit<br/>

At once, this juncture falls out fit,<br/>

I'll make him henceforth to beware,                          1165<br/>

And tempt my fury, if he dare.<br/>

He must at least hold up his hand,<br/>

By twelve freeholders to be scann'd;<br/>

Who, by their skill in palmistry,<br/>

Will quickly read his destiny;                               1170<br/>

And make him glad to read his lesson,<br/>

Or take a turn for it at the session;<br/>

Unless his Light and Gifts prove truer<br/>

Then ever yet they did, I'm sure;<br/>

For if he scape with whipping now,                           1175<br/>

'Tis more than he can hope to do;<br/>

And that will disengage my conscience<br/>

Of th' obligation in his own sense,<br/>

I'll make him now by force abide<br/>

What he by gentle means deny'd,                              1180<br/>

To give my honour satisfaction,<br/>

And right the Brethren in the action.<br/>

This being resolv'd, with equal speed<br/>

And conduct he approach'd his steed,<br/>

And with activity unwont,                                    1185<br/>

Assay'd the lofty beast to mount;<br/>

Which once atchiev'd, he spurr'd his palfrey,<br/>

To get from th' enemy, and RALPH, free<br/>

Left dangers, fears, and foes behind,<br/>

And beat, at least three lengths, the wind.                  1190<br/>
</p>

<h3 id="id00361" style="margin-top: 3em">NOTES TO PART II. CANTO III.</h3>

<p id="id00362" style="margin-top: 2em">140 A &lt;w&gt; Ledger, &amp;c.] The Witch-finder in Suffolk, who, in
the Presbyterian times, had a commission to discover witches,
of whom (right or wrong) he caused 60 to be hanged within the
compass of year; and, among the rest, the old minister, who
been a painful preacher for many years.</p>

<p id="id00363">159 Did he not help the &lt;x&gt; Dutch, &amp;c.] In the beginning of the
Civil Wars of Flanders, the common people of Antwerp in a
tumult broke open the cathedral church, to demolish images and
shrines, and did so much mischief in a small time, that Strada
writes, there were several Devils seen very busy among them,
otherwise it had been impossible.</p>

<p id="id00364">161 &lt;y&gt; Sing catches, &amp;c.] This Devil at Mascon delivered all
his oracles, like his forefathers, in verse, which he sung to tunes.
He made several lampoons upon the Hugonots, and foretold
them many things which afterwards came to pass; as may be
seen his Memoirs, written in French.</p>

<p id="id00365">163 &lt;z&gt; Appear'd in divers, &amp;c.] The History of Dee and the
Devil, published by Mer. Casaubon, Isaac Fil. Prebendary of
Canterbury, has a large account of all those passages, in which
the stile of the true and false angels appears to be penned by one
and the same person.  The Nun of Loudon, in France, and all
her tricks, have been seen by many persons of quality of this
nation yet living, who have made very good observations upon
the French book written on that occasion.</p>

<p id="id00366">165 &lt;a&gt; Met with, &amp;c] A Committee of the Long Parliament,
sitting in the King's-house in Woodstock Park, were terrified
with several apparitions, the particulars whereof were then the
news of the whole nation.</p>

<p id="id00367">157 &lt;b&gt; At Sarum, &amp;c.] Withers has a long story, in doggerel,
of a soldier in the King's army, who being a prisoner at
Salisbury, and drinking a health to the Devil upon his knees,
was carried away by him through a single pane of glass.</p>

<p id="id00368">224 Since old &lt;c&gt; Hodge Bacon, &amp;c.] Roger Bacon, commonly
called Friar Bacon, lived in the reign of Edward I. and, for some
little skill he had in the mathematicks, was by the rabble
accounted a conjurer, and had the sottish story of the Brazen
Head fathered upon him by the ignorant Monks of those days.
Robert Grosthead was Bishop of Lincoln in the of Henry III. He
was a learned man for those times, and for that reason suspected
by the Clergy to be a Conjurer; for which crime, being degraded
by Innocent IV. and summoned to appear at Rome, appealed to
the tribunal of Christ; which our lawyers say is illegal, if not a
Praemunire, for offering to sue in a Foreign Court.</p>

<p id="id00369">513 Which &lt;d&gt; Socrates, &amp;c.] Aristophanes, in his comedy of
the Clouds, brings in Socrates and Chaerephon, measuring the
leap of a flea from the one's beard to the other's.</p>

<p id="id00370">404 &lt;e&gt; Was rais'd by him, &amp;c.] This Fisk was a famous
astrologer, who flourished about the time of Subtile and Face,
and was equally celebrated by Ben Jonson.</p>

<p id="id00371">436 &lt;e&gt; Unless it be, &amp;c.] This experiment was tried by some
foreign Virtuosos, who planted a piece of ordnance point-blank
against the Zenith, and having fired it, the bullet never
rebounded back again; which made them all conclude that it
sticks in the mark: but Des Cartes was of opinion, that it does
but hang in the air.</p>

<p id="id00372">477 &lt;f&gt; As lately 't was, &amp;c.] This Sedgwick had many persons
(and some of quality) that believed in him, and prepared to keep
the day of judgment with him, but were disappointed; for which
the false prophet was afterwards called by the name of Dooms-
day Sedgwick.</p>

<p id="id00373">609 &lt;g&gt; Your modern Indian &amp;c.] This compendious new way
of magick is affirmed by Monsieur Le Blanc (in his travels) to
be used in the East Indies.</p>

<p id="id00374">627 &lt;h&gt; Bumbastus kept, &amp;c.] Paracelsus is said to have kept a
small devil prisoner in the pummel of his sword, which was the
reason, perhaps, why he was so valiant in his drink. Howsoever,
it was to better purpose than Hannibal carried poison in his, to
dispatch himself; for the sword alone would have done the feat
much better, and more soldier-like; and it was below the honour
of so great a commander, to go out of the world like a rat.</p>

<p id="id00375">635 &lt;i&gt; Agrippa kept &amp;c.] Cornelius Agrippa had a dog which
was suspected to be a spirit, for some tricks he was wont to do
beyond the capacity of a dog, as it was thought; but the author
of Magia Adamica has taken a great deal of pains to vindicate
both the doctor and the dog from the aspersion, in which he has
shewn a very great respect and kindness for them both.</p>

<p id="id00376">679 As &lt;k&gt; Averrhois, &amp;c.] Averrhois Astronomium propter
Excentricos contempsit. [Averroes despised the eccentriciticites
of astronomy]. Phil. Melanchthon in Elem. Phil. P 781.</p>

<p id="id00377">691 &lt;l&gt; The Median Emperor dreamt his daughter, &amp;c.]
Astyages, King of Media, had this dream of his daughter
Madane, and the interpretation of the Magi, wherefore he
married her to a Persian of mean quality, by whom she had
Cyrus, who conquered all Asia, and translated the empire from
the Medes to the Persians. — Herodot. L. i.</p>

<p id="id00378">697 &lt;m&gt; When Caesar, &amp;c.] Fiunt aliquando prodigiosi, &amp;
longiores Solus Defectus, quales occisa Caesare Dictatore, &amp;
Antoniano Bello, totius Anni Pallore continuo. [Other miracles
occurred, and the sun was dimmed for a longer time, for
example,  at the death of the Dictator Caesar, and the Antonine
war, its dimness continued for a whole year]  — Phil.</p>

<p id="id00379">701 &lt;n&gt; Augustus having &amp;c.] Divus Augustus laevum sibi
prodidit calceum praepostere idutum, qua die seditione Militum
prope afflictus est. [The Divine Augustus put on his left boot
before the right one, that same day he was afflicted by a mutiny
of the soldiers]  — Idem L. 2.</p>

<p id="id00380">709 &lt;o&gt; The Roman Senate, &amp;c.] Romani L. Crasso &amp; Mario
Coss. Bubone viso orbem lustrabant. [The Romans L Crasso
and Mario Coss. ritually purified the country from (the evil
influence caused by) seeing the owl.]</p>

<p id="id00381">737 For &lt;p&gt; Anaxagoras, &amp;c.] Anaxagoras affirmabat Solem
candens Ferrum esse, &amp; Peloponneso majorem: Lunam
Habitacula in se habere, &amp; Colles, &amp; Valles. Fertur dixisse
Coelum omne ex Lapidibus esse compositum; Damnatus &amp; in
exilium pulsus est, quod impie Solem candentem luminam esse
dixisset. [Anaxogaras stated that the sun was made of white-hot
iron, and bigger than the Peloponnese: the moon had buildings,
and hills, and valleys. He was so carried away that he said that
the whole sky was made of stone. He was condemned and
driven into exile, for speaking impiously about the pure white
light of the sun] — Diog. Laert. in Anaxag. p. 11, 13.</p>

<p id="id00382">865 &lt;q&gt; Th' Egyptians say &amp;c.] Egyptii decem millia Annorum
&amp; amplius recensent; &amp; observatum est in hoc tanto Spatio, bis
mutata esse Loca Ortuum &amp; Occasuum Solis, ita ut Sol bis
ortus sit ubi nunc occidit, &amp; bis descenderit ubi nunc oritur.
[The Egyptians have records for ten thousand years and more,
and it has been observed that during this space of time, the
rising and setting places of the sun have changed twice, so that
twice the sun has risen where it now sets, and twice set where it
now rises] — Phil. Melanct. Lib. 1 Pag. 60.</p>

<p id="id00383">871 &lt;r&gt; Some hold the heavens, &amp;c.] Causa quare Coelum non
cadit (secundem Empedoclem) est velocitas sui motus. [ The
reason the sky does not fall is (according to Empedocles) the
speed it is moving at] — Comment. in L. 2. Aristot. de Coelo.</p>

<p id="id00384">877 &lt;s&gt; Plato believ'd, &amp;c.] Plato Solem &amp; Lunam caeteris<br/>

Planetis inferiores esse putavit. [Plato believed that the Sun and<br/>

Moon were lower than the other planets]— G. Gunnin in<br/>

Cosmog. L. 1. p. 11.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00385">881 &lt;t&gt; The learned Scaliger, &amp;c.] Copernicus in Libris
Revolutionem, deinde Reinholdus, post etiam Stadius
Mathematici nobiles perspicuis Demonstrationibus docuerunt,
solis Apsida Terris esse propiorem, quam Ptolemaei aetate
duodecem partibus, i. e. uno &amp; triginta terrae semidiameteris.
[Copernicus in his Book of Revolutions, and afterwards
Reinholdus, very cleverly showed by mathematical means that
the perihelion of the earth was (become) nearer in the twelve
centuries since Ptolemy, that is, thirty-one times the radius of
the earth.] — Jo. Bod. Met. Hist. p. 455.</p>

<p id="id00386">895 &lt;u&gt; Cardan believ'd, &amp;c.] Putat Cardanus, ab extrema
Cauda Halices seu Majoris Ursae omne magnum Imperium
pendere.[Cardanus believed that the fate of every great empire
depended on the end of the tail of the Thumb or Great Bear] —
Idem p. 325.</p>

<p id="id00387">913 &lt;w&gt; Than th' old Chaldean, &amp;c.] Chaldaei jactant  se
quadringinta septuaginta Annorum millia in periclitandis,
experiundisque Puerorum Animis possuisse.[The Chaldeans
alleged that they were forty or seventy thousand years in
experiments to possess the souls of boys] — Cicero</p>

<p id="id00388">975 &lt;x&gt; Like Money, &amp;c.] Druidae pecuniam mutuo
accipiebant in posteriore vita reddituri. [The Druids accepted
money from one another to be repaid in the next life] —
Patricius. Tom.2 p.9.</p>

<p id="id00389">1001 &lt;y&gt; That paltry story, &amp;c.]  There was a notorious ideot
(that is here described by the name and character of Whachum)
who counterfeited a second part of Hudibras, as untowardly as
Captain Po, who could not write himself, and yet made a shift
to stand on the pillory for forging other men's hands, as his
fellow Whachum no doubt deserved; in whose abominable
doggerel this story of Hudibras and a French mountebank at
Brentford fair is as properly described.</p>

<p id="id00390">1024 That the &lt;z&gt; vibration &amp;c.] The device of the vibration of
a Pendulum was intended to settle a certain measure of ells and
yards, &amp;c. (that should have its foundation in nature) all the
world over: For by swinging a weight at the end of a string, and
calculating by the motion of the sun, or any star, how long the
vibration would last, in proportion to the length of the string,
and the weight of the pendulum, they thought to reduce it back
again, and from any part of time to compute the exact length of
any string that must necessarily vibrate into so much space of
time; so that if a man should ask in China for a quarter of an
hour of satin, or taffeta, they would know perfectly what it
meant; and all mankind learn a new way to measure things, no
more by the yard, foot or inch, but by the hour, quarter, and
minute.</p>

<p id="id00391">1113 &lt;a&gt; Before the Secular, &amp;c.] As the Devil is the Spiritual
Prince of Darkness, so is the Constable the Secular, who
governs the night with as great authority as his colleague, but
far more imperiously.</p>

<h3 id="id00392" style="margin-top: 3em">AN HEROICAL EPISTLE OF HUDIBRAS TO SIDROPHEL</h3>

<p id="id00393" style="margin-top: 2em">————————————-
Ecce Iterum Crispinus.—-
————————————-</p>

<p id="id00394">WELL! SIDROPHEL, though 'tis in vain<br/>

To tamper with your crazy brain,<br/>

Without trepanning of your skull<br/>

As often as the moon's at full<br/>

'Tis not amiss, e're y' are giv'n o'er,                         5<br/>

To try one desp'rate med'cine more<br/>

For where your case can be no worse,<br/>

The desp'rat'st is the wisest course.<br/>

Is't possible that you, whose ears<br/>

Are of the tribe of Issachar's,                                10<br/>

And might (with equal reason) either,<br/>

For merit, or extent of leather,<br/>

With WILLIAM PRYN'S, before they were<br/>

Retrench'd and crucify'd, compare,<br/>

Shou'd yet be deaf against a noise                             15<br/>

So roaring as the publick voice<br/>

That speaks your virtues free, and loud,<br/>

And openly, in ev'ry crowd,<br/>

As, loud as one that sings his part<br/>

T' a wheel-barrow or turnip-cart,                              20<br/>

Or your new nick-nam'd old invention<br/>

To cry green-hastings with an engine;<br/>

(As if the vehemence had stunn'd,<br/>

And turn your drum-heads with the sound;)<br/>

And 'cause your folly's now no news,                           25<br/>

But overgrown, and out of use,<br/>

Persuade yourself there's no such matter,<br/>

But that 'tis vanish'd out of nature;<br/>

When folly, as it grows in years,<br/>

The more extravagant appears;                                  30<br/>

For who but you could be possest<br/>

With so much ignorance, and beast,<br/>

That neither all mens' scorn and hate,<br/>

Nor being laugh'd and pointed at,<br/>

Nor bray'd so often in a mortar,                               35<br/>

Can teach you wholesome sense and nurture;<br/>

But (like a reprobate) what course<br/>

Soever's us'd, grow worse and worse<br/>

Can no transfusion of the blood,<br/>

That makes fools cattle, do you good?                          40<br/>

Nor putting pigs t' a bitch to nurse,<br/>

To turn 'em into mungrel-curs,<br/>

Put you into a way, at least,<br/>

To make yourself a better beast?<br/>

Can all your critical intrigues                                45<br/>

Of trying sound from rotten eggs;<br/>

Your several new-found remedies<br/>

Of curing wounds and scabs in trees;<br/>

Your arts of flexing them for claps,<br/>

And purging their infected saps;                               50<br/>

Recov'ring shankers, crystallines,<br/>

And nodes and botches in their rinds,<br/>

Have no effect to operate<br/>

Upon that duller block, your pate?<br/>

But still it must be lewdly bent                               55<br/>

To tempt your own due punishment;<br/>

And, like your whymsy'd chariots, draw,<br/>

The boys to course you without law;<br/>

As if the art you have so long<br/>

Profess'd, of making old dogs young,                           60<br/>

In you had virtue to renew<br/>

Not only youth, but childhood too.<br/>

Can you that understand all books,<br/>

By judging only with your looks,<br/>

Resolve all problems with your face,                           65<br/>

As others do with B's and A's;<br/>

Unriddle all that mankind knows<br/>

With solid bending of your brows;<br/>

All arts and sciences advance,<br/>

With screwing of your countenance,                             70<br/>

And, with a penetrating eye,<br/>

Into th' abstrusest learning pry?<br/>

Know more of any trade b' a hint;<br/>

Than those that have been bred up in't;<br/>

And yet have no art, true or false,                            75<br/>

To help your own bad naturals;<br/>

But still, the more you strive t' appear,<br/>

Are found to be the wretcheder<br/>

For fools are known by looking wise,<br/>

As men find woodcocks by their eyes.                           80<br/>

Hence 'tis that 'cause y' have gain'd o' th' college<br/>

A quarter share (at most) of knowledge,<br/>

And brought in none, but spent repute,<br/>

Y' assume a pow'r as absolute<br/>

To judge, and censure, and controll,                           85<br/>

As if you were the sole Sir Poll;<br/>

And saucily pretend to know<br/>

More than your dividend comes to.<br/>

You'll find the thing will not be done<br/>

With ignorance and face alone                                  90<br/>

No, though y' have purchas'd to your name,<br/>

In history, so great a fame;<br/>

That now your talents, so well<br/>

For having all belief out-grown,<br/>

That ev'ry strange prodigious tale                             95<br/>

Is measur'd by your German scale;<br/>

By which the virtuosi try<br/>

The magnitude of ev'ry lye,<br/>

Cast up to what it does amount,<br/>

And place the bigg'st to your account?                        100<br/>

That all those stories that are laid<br/>

Too truly to you, and those made,<br/>

Are now still charg'd upon your score,<br/>

And lesser authors nam'd no more.<br/>

Alas! that faculty betrays                                    105<br/>

Those soonest it designs to raise;<br/>

And all your vain renown will spoil,<br/>

As guns o'ercharg'd the more recoil.<br/>

Though he that has but impudence,<br/>

To all things has a fair pretence;                            110<br/>

And put among his wants but shame,<br/>

To all the world may lay his claim:<br/>

Though you have try'd that nothing's borne<br/>

With greater ease than public scorn,<br/>

That all affronts do still give place                         115<br/>

To your impenetrable face,<br/>

That makes your way through all affairs,<br/>

As pigs through hedges creep with theirs;<br/>

Yet as 'tis counterfeit, and brass,<br/>

You must not think 'twill always pass;                        120<br/>

For all impostors, when they're known,<br/>

Are past their labour, and undone.<br/>

And all the best that can befal<br/>

An artificial natural,<br/>

Is that which madmen find as soon                             125<br/>

As once they're broke loose from the moon,<br/>

And, proof against her influence,<br/>

Relapse to e'er so little sense,<br/>

To turn stark fools, and subjects fit<br/>

For sport of boys, and rabble-wit.                            130<br/>
</p>

<h3 id="id00395" style="margin-top: 3em">PART III.</h3>

<h4 id="id00396" style="margin-top: 2em">CANTO I.</h4>

<h4 id="id00397" style="margin-top: 2em">THE ARGUMENT.</h4>

<p id="id00398">————————————————————————-<br/>

The Knight and Squire resolve, at once,<br/>

The one the other to renounce.<br/>

They both approach the Lady's Bower;<br/>

The Squire t'inform, the Knight to woo her.<br/>

She treats them with a Masquerade,<br/>

By Furies and Hobgoblins made;<br/>

From which the Squire conveys the Knight,<br/>

And steals him from himself, by Night.<br/>

————————————————————————-<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00399" style="margin-top: 2em">'Tis true, no lover has that pow'r<br/>

T' enforce a desperate amour,<br/>

As he that has two strings t' his bow,<br/>

And burns for love and money too;<br/>

For then he's brave and resolute,                               5<br/>

Disdains to render in his suit,<br/>

Has all his flames and raptures double,<br/>

And hangs or drowns with half the trouble,<br/>

While those who sillily pursue,<br/>

The simple, downright way, and true,                           10<br/>

Make as unlucky applications,<br/>

And steer against the stream their passions.<br/>

Some forge their mistresses of stars,<br/>

And when the ladies prove averse,<br/>

And &lt;a&gt; more untoward to be won                                15<br/>

Than by CALIGULA the Moon,<br/>

Cry out upon the stars, for doing<br/>

Ill offices to cross their wooing;<br/>

When only by themselves they're hindred,<br/>

For trusting those they made her kindred;                      20<br/>

And still, the harsher and hide-bounder<br/>

The damsels prove, become the fonder.<br/>

For what mad lover ever dy'd<br/>

To gain a soft and gentle bride?<br/>

Or for a lady tender-hearted,                                  25<br/>

In purling streams or hemp departed?<br/>

Leap'd headlong int' Elysium,<br/>

Through th' windows of a dazzling room?<br/>

But for some cross, ill-natur'd dame,<br/>

The am'rous fly burnt in his flame.                            30<br/>

This to the Knight could be no news,<br/>

With all mankind so much in use;<br/>

Who therefore took the wiser course,<br/>

To make the most of his amours,<br/>

Resolv'd to try all sorts of ways,                             35<br/>

As follows in due time and place<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00400">No sooner was the bloody fight,<br/>

Between the Wizard, and the Knight,<br/>

With all th' appurtenances, over,<br/>

But he relaps'd again t' a lover;                              40<br/>

As he was always wont to do,<br/>

When h' had discomfited a foe<br/>

And us'd the only antique &lt;b&gt; philters,<br/>

Deriv'd from old heroic tilters.<br/>

But now triumphant, and victorious,                            45<br/>

He held th' atchievement was too glorious<br/>

For such a conqueror to meddle<br/>

With petty constable or beadle,<br/>

Or fly for refuge to the Hostess<br/>

Of th' Inns of Court and Chancery, Justice,<br/>

Who might, perhaps reduce his cause                            50<br/>

To th' &lt;c&gt;ordeal trial of the laws,<br/>

Where none escape, but such as branded<br/>

With red-hot irons have past bare-handed;<br/>

And, if they cannot read one verse<br/>

I' th' Psalms, must sing it, and that's worse.                 55<br/>

He therefore judging it below him,<br/>

To tempt a shame the Devil might owe him,<br/>

Resolv'd to leave the Squire for bail<br/>

And mainprize for him to the gaol,<br/>

To answer, with his vessel, all,                               60<br/>

That might disastrously befall;<br/>

And thought it now the fittest juncture<br/>

To give the Lady a rencounter,<br/>

T' acquaint her 'with his expedition,                          65<br/>

And conquest o'er the fierce Magician;<br/>

Describe the manner of the fray,<br/>

And show the spoils he brought away,<br/>

His bloody scourging aggravate,<br/>

The number of his blows, and weight,                           70<br/>

All which might probably succeed,<br/>

And gain belief h' had done the deed,<br/>

Which he resolv'd t' enforce, and spare<br/>

No pawning of his soul to swear,<br/>

But, rather than produce his back,                             75<br/>

To set his conscience on the rack,<br/>

And in pursuance of his urging<br/>

Of articles perform'd and scourging,<br/>

And all things else, his part,<br/>

Demand deliv'ry of her heart,                                  80<br/>

Her goods, and chattels, and good graces,<br/>

And person up to his embraces.<br/>

Thought he, the ancient errant knights<br/>

Won all their ladies hearts in fights;<br/>

And cut whole giants into fritters,                            85<br/>

To put them into amorous twitters<br/>

Whose stubborn bowels scorn'd to yield<br/>

Until their gallants were half kill'd<br/>

But when their bones were drub'd so sore<br/>

They durst not woo one combat more,                            90<br/>

The ladies hearts began to melt,<br/>

Subdu'd by blows their lovers felt.<br/>

So &lt;d&gt; Spanish heroes, with their lances,<br/>

At once wound bulls and ladies' fancies;<br/>

And he acquires the noblest spouse                             95<br/>

That widows greatest herds of cows:<br/>

Then what may I expect to do,<br/>

Wh' have quell'd so vast a buffalo?<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00401">Mean while, the Squire was on his way<br/>

The Knight's late orders to obey;                             100<br/>

Who sent him for a strong detachment<br/>

Of beadles, constables, and watchmen,<br/>

T' attack the cunning-man fur plunder,<br/>

Committed falsely on his lumber;<br/>

When he, who had so lately sack'd                             105<br/>

The enemy, had done the fact;<br/>

Had rifled all his pokes and fobs<br/>

Of gimcracks, whims, and jiggumbobs,<br/>

When he, by hook or crook, had gather'd,<br/>

And for his own inventions father'd                           110<br/>

And when they should, at gaol delivery,<br/>

Unriddle one another's thievery,<br/>

Both might have evidence enough,<br/>

To render neither halter proof.<br/>

He thought it desperate to tarry,                             115<br/>

And venture to be accessary<br/>

But rather wisely slip his fetters,<br/>

And leave them for the Knight, his betters.<br/>

He call'd to mind th' unjust, foul play<br/>

He wou'd have offer'd him that day,                           120<br/>

To make him curry his own hide,<br/>

Which no beast ever did beside,<br/>

Without all possible evasion,<br/>

But of the riding dispensation;<br/>

And therefore much about the hour                             125<br/>

The Knight (for reasons told before)<br/>

Resolv'd to leave them to the fury<br/>

Of Justice, and an unpack'd Jury,<br/>

The Squire concurr'd t' abandon him,<br/>

And serve him in the self-same trim;                          130<br/>

T' acquaint the Lady what h' had done,<br/>

And what he meant to carry on;<br/>

What project 'twas he went about,<br/>

When SIDROPHEL and he fell out;<br/>

His firm and stedfast Resolution,                             135<br/>

To swear her to an execution;<br/>

To pawn his &lt;e&gt; inward ears to marry her,<br/>

And bribe the Devil himself to carry her;<br/>

In which both dealt, as if they meant<br/>

Their Party-Saints to represent,                              140<br/>

Who never fail'd upon their sharing<br/>

In any prosperous arms-bearing<br/>

To lay themselves out to supplant<br/>

Each other Cousin-German Saint.<br/>

But, ere the Knight could do his part,                        145<br/>

The Squire had got so much the start,<br/>

H' had to the Lady done his errand,<br/>

And told her all his tricks afore-hand.<br/>

Just as he finish'd his report,<br/>

The Knight alighted in the court;                             150<br/>

And having ty'd his beast t' a pale,<br/>

And taking time for both to stale,<br/>

He put his band and beard in order,<br/>

The sprucer to accost and board her;<br/>

And now began t' approach the door,                           155<br/>

When she, wh' had spy'd him out before<br/>

Convey'd th' informer out of sight,<br/>

And went to entertain the Knight<br/>

With whom encount'ring, after longees<br/>

Of humble and submissive congees,                             160<br/>

And all due ceremonies paid,<br/>

He strok'd his beard, and thus he said:<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00402">Madam, I do, as is my duty,<br/>

Honour the shadow of your shoe-tye;<br/>

And now am come to bring your ear                             165<br/>

A present you'll be glad to hear:<br/>

At least I hope so: the thing's done,<br/>

Or may I never see the sun;<br/>

For which I humbly now demand<br/>

Performance at your gentle hand                               170<br/>

And that you'd please to do your part,<br/>

As I have done mine, to my smart.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00403">With that he shrugg'd his sturdy back<br/>

As if he felt his shoulders ake.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00404">But she, who well enough knew what                            175<br/>

(Before he spoke) he would be at,<br/>

Pretended not to apprehend<br/>

The mystery of what he mean'd;.<br/>

And therefore wish'd him to expound<br/>

His dark expressions, less profound.                          180<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00405">Madam, quoth he, I come to prove<br/>

How much I've suffer'd for your love,<br/>

Which (like your votary) to win,<br/>

I have not spar'd my tatter'd skin<br/>

And for those meritorious lashes,                             185<br/>

To claim your favour and good graces.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00406">Quoth she, I do remember once<br/>

I freed you from th' inchanted sconce;<br/>

And that you promis'd, for that favour,<br/>

To bind your back to good behaviour,                          190<br/>

And, for my sake and service, vow'd<br/>

To lay upon't a heavy load,<br/>

And what 'twould bear t' a scruple prove,<br/>

As other Knights do oft make love<br/>

Which, whether you have done or no,                           195<br/>

Concerns yourself, not me, to know.<br/>

But if you have, I shall confess,<br/>

Y' are honester than I could guess.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00407">Quoth he, if you suspect my troth,<br/>

I cannot prove it but by oath;                                200<br/>

And  if you make a question on't,<br/>

I'll pawn my soul that I have done't;<br/>

And he that makes his soul his surety,<br/>

I think, does give the best security.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00408">Quoth she, Some say, the soul's secure                        205<br/>

Against distress and forfeiture<br/>

Is free from action, and exempt<br/>

From execution and contempt;<br/>

And to be summon'd to appear<br/>

In th' other world's illegal here;                            210<br/>

And therefore few make any account<br/>

Int' what incumbrances they run't<br/>

For most men carry things so even<br/>

Between this World, and Hell, and Heaven,<br/>

Without the least offence to either,                          215<br/>

They freely deal in all together;<br/>

And equally abhor to quit<br/>

This world for both or both for it;<br/>

And when they pawn and damn their souls,<br/>

They are but pris'ners on paroles.                            220<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00409">For that (quoth he) 'tis rational,<br/>

Th' may be accountable in all:<br/>

For when there is that intercourse<br/>

Between divine and human pow'rs,<br/>

That all that we determine here                               225<br/>

Commands obedience every where,<br/>

When penalties may be commuted<br/>

For fines or ears, and executed<br/>

It follows, nothing binds so fast<br/>

As souls in pawn and mortgage past                            230<br/>

For oaths are th' only tests and seals<br/>

Of right and wrong, and true and false,<br/>

And there's no other way to try<br/>

The doubts of law and justice by.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00410">(Quoth she) What is it you would swear                        235<br/>

There's no believing till I hear<br/>

For, till they're understood all tales<br/>

(Like nonsense) are not true nor false.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00411">(Quoth he) When I resolv'd t' obey<br/>

What you commanded th' other day,                             240<br/>

And to perform my exercise,<br/>

(As schools are wont) for your fair eyes,<br/>

T' avoid all scruples in the case,<br/>

I went to do't upon the place.<br/>

But as the Castle is inchanted                                245<br/>

By SIDROPHEL the Witch and haunted<br/>

By evil spirits, as you know,<br/>

Who took my Squire and me for two,<br/>

Before I'd hardly time to lay<br/>

My weapons by, and disarray                                   250<br/>

I heard a formidable noise,<br/>

Loud as the &lt;f&gt; Stentrophonick voice,<br/>

That roar'd far off, Dispatch and strip,<br/>

I'm ready with th' infernal whip,<br/>

That shall divest thy ribs from skin,                         255<br/>

To expiate thy ling'ring sin.<br/>

Th' hast broken perfidiously thy oath,<br/>

And not perform'd thy plighted troth;<br/>

But spar'd thy renegado back,<br/>

Where th' hadst so great a prize at stake;                    260<br/>

Which now the fates have order'd me<br/>

For penance and revenge to flea,<br/>

Unless thou presently make haste:<br/>

Time is, time was: And there it ceas'd.<br/>

With which, though startled, I confess,                       265<br/>

Yet th' horror of the thing was less<br/>

Than th' other dismal apprehension<br/>

Of interruption or prevention;<br/>

And therefore, snatching up the rod,<br/>

I laid upon my back a load;                                   270<br/>

Resolv'd to spare no flesh and blood,<br/>

To make my word and honour good;<br/>

Till tir'd, and making truce at length,<br/>

For new recruits of breath and strength,<br/>

I felt the blows still ply'd as fast                          275<br/>

As th' had been by &lt;g&gt; lovers plac'd,<br/>

In raptures of platonick lashing,<br/>

And chaste contemplative bardashing;<br/>

When facing hastily about,<br/>

To stand upon my guard and scout,                             280<br/>

I found th' infernal Cunning-man,<br/>

And th' under-witch, his CALIBAN,<br/>

With scourges (like the Furies) arm'd,<br/>

That on my outward quarters storm'd.<br/>

In haste I snatch'd my weapon up,                             285<br/>

And gave their hellish rage a stop;<br/>

Call'd thrice upon your name, and fell<br/>

Courageously on SIDROPHEL;<br/>

Who, now transform'd himself a bear,<br/>

Began to roar aloud, and tear;                                290<br/>

When I as furiously press'd on,<br/>

My weapon down his throat to run;<br/>

Laid hold on him; but he broke loose,<br/>

And turn'd himself into a goose;<br/>

Div'd under water, in a pond,                                 295<br/>

To hide himself from being found.<br/>

In vain I sought him; but, as soon<br/>

As I perceiv'd him fled and gone,<br/>

Prepar'd with equal haste and rage,<br/>

His Under-sorcerer t' engage.                                 300<br/>

But bravely scorning to defile<br/>

My sword with feeble blood and vile,<br/>

I judg'd it better from a quick-<br/>

Set hedge to cut a knotted stick,<br/>

With which I furiously laid on                                305<br/>

Till, in a harsh and doleful tone,<br/>

It roar'd, O hold for pity, Sir<br/>

I am too great a sufferer,<br/>

Abus'd, as you have been, b' a witch,<br/>

But conjur'd into a worse caprich;                            310<br/>

Who sends me out on many a jaunt,<br/>

Old houses in the night to haunt,<br/>

For opportunities t' improve<br/>

Designs of thievery or love;<br/>

With drugs convey'd in drink or meat,                         315<br/>

All teats of witches counterfeit;<br/>

Kill pigs and geese with powder'd glass,<br/>

And make it for enchantment pass;<br/>

With cow-itch meazle like a leper,<br/>

And choak with fumes of guiney pepper;                        320<br/>

Make leachers and their punks with dewtry,<br/>

Commit fantastical advowtry;<br/>

Bewitch &lt;h&gt; Hermetick-men to run<br/>

Stark staring mad with manicon;<br/>

Believe mechanick Virtuosi                                    325<br/>

Can raise 'em mountains in &lt;i&gt; POTOSI;<br/>

And, sillier than the antick fools,<br/>

Take treasure for a heap of coals:<br/>

Seek out for plants with signatures,<br/>

To quack of universal cures:                                  330<br/>

With figures ground on panes of glass<br/>

Make people on their heads to pass;<br/>

And mighty heaps of coin increase,<br/>

Reflected from a single piece,<br/>

To draw in fools, whose nat'ral itches                        335<br/>

Incline perpetually to witches;<br/>

And keep me in continual fears,<br/>

And danger of my neck and ears;<br/>

When less delinquents have been scourg'd,<br/>

And hemp on wooden anvil forg'd,                              340<br/>

Which others for cravats have worn<br/>

About their necks, and took a turn.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00412">I pity'd the sad punishment<br/>

The wretched caitiff underwent,<br/>

And left my drubbing of his bones,                            345<br/>

Too great an honour for pultrones;<br/>

For Knights are bound to feel no blows<br/>

From paultry and unequal foes,<br/>

Who, when they slash, and cut to pieces,<br/>

Do all with civilest addresses:                               350<br/>

Their horses never give a blow,<br/>

But when they make a leg, and bow.<br/>

I therefore spar'd his flesh, and prest him<br/>

About the witch with many a. question.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00413">Quoth he, For many years he drove                             355<br/>

A kind of broking-trade in love;<br/>

Employ'd in all th' intrigues, and trust<br/>

Of feeble, speculative lust:<br/>

Procurer to th' extravagancy,<br/>

And crazy ribaldry of fancy,                                  360<br/>

By those the Devil had forsook,<br/>

As things below him to provoke.<br/>

But b'ing a virtuoso, able<br/>

To smatter, quack, and cant, and dabble,<br/>

He held his talent most adroit                                365<br/>

For any mystical exploit;<br/>

As others of his tribe had done,<br/>

And rais'd their prices three to one:<br/>

For one predicting pimp has th' odds<br/>

Of chauldrons of plain downright bawds.                       370<br/>

But as an elf (the Devil's valet)<br/>

Is not so slight a thing to get;<br/>

For those that do his bus'ness best,<br/>

In hell are us'd the ruggedest;<br/>

Before so meriting a person                                   375<br/>

Cou'd get a grant, but in reversion,<br/>

He serv'd two prenticeships, and longer,<br/>

I' th' myst'ry of a lady-monger.<br/>

For (as some write) a witch's ghost,<br/>

As soon as from the body loos'd,                              380<br/>

Becomes a puney-imp itself<br/>

And is another witch's elf.<br/>

He, after searching far and near,<br/>

At length found one in LANCASHIRE<br/>

With whom he bargain'd before-hand,                           385<br/>

And, after hanging, entertained;<br/>

Since which h' has play'd a thousand feats,<br/>

And practis'd all mechanick cheats,<br/>

Transform'd himself to th' ugly shapes<br/>

Of wolves and bears, baboons and apes,                        390<br/>

Which he has vary'd more than witches,<br/>

Or Pharaoh's wizards cou'd their switches;<br/>

And all with whom h' has had to do,<br/>

Turn'd to as monstrous figures too.<br/>

Witness myself, whom h' has abus'd,                           395<br/>

And to this beastly shape reduc'd,<br/>

By feeding me on beans and pease,<br/>

He crams in nasty crevices,<br/>

And turns to comfits by his arts,<br/>

To make me relish for disserts,                               400<br/>

And one by one, with shame and fear,<br/>

Lick up the candy'd provender.<br/>

Beside — But as h' was running on,<br/>

To tell what other feats h' had done,<br/>

The Lady stopt his full career,                               405<br/>

And told him now 'twas time to hear<br/>

If half those things (said she) be true —<br/>

They're all, (quoth he,) I swear by you.<br/>

Why then (said she,) That SIDROPHEL<br/>

Has damn'd himself to th' pit of Hell;                        410<br/>

Who, mounted on a broom, the nag<br/>

And hackney of a Lapland hag,<br/>

In quest of you came hither post,<br/>

Within an hour (I'm sure) at most;<br/>

Who told me all you swear and say,                            415<br/>

Quite contrary another way;<br/>

Vow'd that you came to him to know<br/>

If you should carry me or no;<br/>

And would have hir'd him, and his imps,<br/>

To be your match-makers and pimps,                            420<br/>

T' engage the Devil on. your side,<br/>

And steal (like PROSERPINE) your bride.<br/>

But he, disdaining to embrace.<br/>

So filthy a design and base,<br/>

You fell to vapouring and huffing                             425<br/>

And drew upon him like a ruffin;<br/>

Surpriz'd him meanly, unprepar'd,<br/>

Before h' had time to mount his guard;<br/>

And left him dead upon the ground,<br/>

With many a bruise and desperate wound:                       430<br/>

Swore you had broke and robb'd his house,<br/>

And stole his talismanique louse,<br/>

And all his new-found old inventions;.<br/>

With flat felonious intentions;<br/>

Which he could bring out where he had,                        435<br/>

And what he bought them for, and paid.<br/>

His flea, his morpion, and punese,<br/>

H' had gotten for his proper ease,<br/>

And all perfect minutes made,<br/>

By th' ablest artist of the trade;                            440<br/>

Which (he could prove it) since he lost,<br/>

He has been eaten up almost;<br/>

And all together might amount<br/>

To many hundreds on account;<br/>

For which h' had got sufficient warrant                       445<br/>

To seize the malefactors errant,<br/>

Without capacity of bail,<br/>

But of a cart's or horse's tail;<br/>

And did not doubt to bring the wretches<br/>

To serve for pendulums to watches;                            450<br/>

Which, modern virtuosos say,<br/>

Incline to hanging every way.<br/>

Beside, he swore, and swore 'twas true,<br/>

That, e're he went in quest of you,<br/>

He set a figure to discover                                   455<br/>

If you were fled to RYE or DOVER;<br/>

And found it clear, that, to betray<br/>

Yourselves and me, you fled this way;<br/>

And that he was upon pursuit,<br/>

To take you somewhere hereabout.                              460<br/>

He vow' d he had intelligence<br/>

Of all that past before and since;<br/>

And found that, e'er you came to him,.<br/>

Y' had been engaging life and limb<br/>

About a case of tender conscience,                            465<br/>

Where both abounded in your own sense:<br/>

Till RALPHO, by his light and grace,<br/>

Had clear'd all scruples in the case;<br/>

And prov'd that you might swear and own<br/>

Whatever's by the wicked done,                                470<br/>

For which, most basely to requite<br/>

The service of his gifts and light,<br/>

You strove to oblige him, by main force,<br/>

To scourge his ribs instead of yours;<br/>

But that he stood upon his guard,                             475<br/>

And all your vapouring out-dar'd;<br/>

For which, between you both, the feat<br/>

Has never been perform'd as yet.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00414">While thus the Lady talk'd, the Knight<br/>

Turn'd th' outside of his eyes to white;                      480<br/>

(As men of inward light are wont<br/>

To  turn their opticks in upon 't)<br/>

He wonder'd  how she came to know<br/>

What he had done, and meant to do;<br/>

Held up his affidavit-hand,                                   485<br/>

As if h' had been to be arraign'd;<br/>

Cast t'wards the door a look,<br/>

In dread of SIDROPHEL, and spoke:<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00415">Madam, if but one word be true<br/>

Of all the Wizard has told you,                               490<br/>

Or but one single circumstance<br/>

In all th' apocryphal romance,<br/>

May dreadful earthquakes swallow down<br/>

This vessel, that is all your own;<br/>

Or may the heavens fall, and cover                            495<br/>

These reliques of your constant lover.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00416">You have provided well, quoth she,<br/>

(I thank you) for yourself and me,<br/>

And shown your presbyterian wits<br/>

Jump punctual with the Jesuits;                               500<br/>

A most compendious way, and civil,<br/>

At once to cheat the world, the Devil,<br/>

And Heaven and Hell, yourselves, and those<br/>

On whom you vainly think t' impose.<br/>

Why then (quoth he) may Hell surprize —                      505<br/>

That trick (said she) will not pass twice:<br/>

I've learn'd how far I'm to believe<br/>

Your pinning oaths upon your sleeve.<br/>

But there's a better way of clearing<br/>

What you would prove than downright swearing:                 510<br/>

For if you have perform'd the feat,<br/>

The blows are visible as yet,<br/>

Enough to serve for satisfaction<br/>

Of nicest scruples in the action:<br/>

And if you can produce those knobs,                           515<br/>

Although they're but the witch's drubs,<br/>

I'll pass them all upon account,<br/>

As if your natural self had done't<br/>

Provided that they pass th' opinion<br/>

Of able juries of old women                                   520<br/>

Who, us'd to judge all matter of facts<br/>

For bellies, may do so for backs,<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00417">Madam, (quoth he,) your love's a million;<br/>

To do is less than to be willing,<br/>

As I am, were it in my power,                                 525<br/>

T' obey, what you command, and more:<br/>

But for performing what you bid,<br/>

I thank you as much as if I did.<br/>

You know I ought to have a care<br/>

To keep my wounds from taking air:                            530<br/>

For wounds in those that are all heart,<br/>

Are dangerous in any part.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00418">I find (quoth she) my goods and chattels<br/>

Are like to prove but mere drawn battels;<br/>

For still the longer we contend,                              535<br/>

We are but farther off the end.<br/>

But granting now we should agree,<br/>

What is it you expect from me?<br/>

Your plighted faith (quoth he) and word<br/>

You past in heaven on record,                                 540<br/>

Where all contracts, to have and t' hold,<br/>

Are everlastingly enroll'd:<br/>

And if 'tis counted treason here<br/>

To raze records, 'tis much more there.<br/>

Quoth she, There are no bargains driv'n,                      545<br/>

Or marriages clapp'd up, in Heav'n,<br/>

And that's the reason, as some guess,<br/>

There is no heav'n in marriages;<br/>

Two things that naturally press<br/>

Too narrowly to be at ease.                                   550<br/>

Their bus'ness there is only love,<br/>

Which marriage is not like t' improve:<br/>

Love, that's too generous to abide<br/>

To be against its nature ty'd;<br/>

Or where 'tis of itself inclin'd,                             555<br/>

It breaks loose when it is confin'd;<br/>

And like the soul, it's harbourer.<br/>

Debarr'd the freedom of the air,<br/>

Disdains against its will to stay,<br/>

But struggles out, and flies away;                            560<br/>

And therefore never can comply<br/>

To endure the matrimonial tie,<br/>

That binds the female and the male,<br/>

Where th' one is but the other's bail;<br/>

Like Roman gaolers, when they slept,                          565<br/>

Chain'd to the prisoners they kept<br/>

Of which the true and faithfull'st lover<br/>

Gives best security to suffer.<br/>

Marriage is but a beast, some say,<br/>

That carries double in foul way;                              570<br/>

And therefore 'tis not to b' admir'd,<br/>

It should so suddenly be tir'd;<br/>

A bargain at a venture made,<br/>

Between two partners in a trade;<br/>

(For what's inferr'd by t' have and t' hold,                  575<br/>

But something past away, and sold?)<br/>

That as it makes but one of two,<br/>

Reduces all things else as low;<br/>

And, at the best, is but a mart<br/>

Between the one and th' other part,                           580<br/>

That on the marriage-day is paid,<br/>

Or hour of death, the bet is laid;<br/>

And all the rest of better or worse,<br/>

Both are but losers out of purse.<br/>

For when upon their ungot heirs                               585<br/>

Th' entail themselves, and all that's theirs,<br/>

What blinder bargain e'er was driv'n,<br/>

Or wager laid at six and seven?<br/>

To pass themselves away, and turn<br/>

Their childrens' tenants e're they're born?                   590<br/>

Beg one another idiot<br/>

To guardians, e'er they are begot;<br/>

Or ever shall, perhaps, by th' one,<br/>

Who's bound to vouch 'em for his own,<br/>

Though got b' implicit generation,                            595<br/>

And gen'ral club of all the nation;<br/>

For which she's fortify'd no less<br/>

Than all the island, with four seas;<br/>

Exacts the tribute of her dower,<br/>

in ready insolence and power;                                 600<br/>

And makes him pass away to have<br/>

And hold, to her, himself, her slave,<br/>

&lt;k&gt; More wretched than an ancient villain,<br/>

Condemn'd to drudgery and tilling;<br/>

While all he does upon the by,                                605<br/>

She is not bound to justify,<br/>

Nor at her proper cost and charge<br/>

Maintain the feats he does at large.<br/>

Such hideous sots were those obedient<br/>

Old vassals to their ladies regent;                           610<br/>

To give the cheats the eldest hand<br/>

In foul play by the laws o' th' land;<br/>

For which so many a legal cuckold<br/>

Has been run down in courts and truckeld:<br/>

A law that most unjustly yokes                                615<br/>

All Johns of Stiles to Joans of Nokes,<br/>

Without distinction of degree,<br/>

Condition, age, or quality:<br/>

Admits no power of revocation,<br/>

Nor valuable consideration,                                   620<br/>

Nor writ of error, nor reverse<br/>

Of Judgment past, for better or worse:<br/>

Will not allow the priviledges<br/>

That beggars challenge under hedges,<br/>

Who, when they're griev'd, can make dead horses               625<br/>

Their spiritual judges of divorces;<br/>

While nothing else but Rem in Re<br/>

Can set the proudest wretches free;<br/>

A slavery beyond enduring,<br/>

But that 'tis of their own procuring.                         630<br/>

As spiders never seek the fly,<br/>

But leave him, of himself, t' apply<br/>

So men are by themselves employ'd,<br/>

To quit the freedom they enjoy'd,<br/>

And run their necks into a noose,                             635<br/>

They'd break 'em after, to break loose;<br/>

As some whom Death would not depart,<br/>

Have done the feat themselves by art;<br/>

Like &lt;l&gt; Indian widows, gone to bed<br/>

In flaming curtains to the dead;                              640<br/>

And men as often dangled for't,<br/>

And yet will never leave the sport.<br/>

Nor do the ladies want excuse<br/>

For all the stratagems they use<br/>

To gain the advantage of the set,                             645<br/>

And lurch the amorous rook and cheat<br/>

For as the &lt;m&gt; Pythagorean soul<br/>

Runs through all beasts, and fish and fowl,<br/>

And has a smack of ev'ry one,<br/>

So love does, and has ever done;                              650<br/>

And therefore, though 'tis ne'er so fond,<br/>

Takes strangely to the vagabond.<br/>

'Tis but an ague that's reverst,<br/>

Whose hot fit takes the patient first,<br/>

That after burns with cold as much                            655<br/>

As ir'n in GREENLAND does the touch;<br/>

Melts in the furnace of desire<br/>

Like glass, that's but the ice of fire;<br/>

And when his heat of fancy's over,<br/>

Becomes as hard and frail a lover.                            660<br/>

For when he's with love-powder laden,<br/>

And prim'd and cock'd by Miss or Madam,<br/>

The smallest sparkle of an eye<br/>

Gives fire to his artillery;<br/>

And off the loud oaths go; but while                          665<br/>

They're in the very act, recoil.<br/>

Hence 'tis so few dare take their chance<br/>

Without a sep'rate maintenance;<br/>

And widows, who have try'd one lover,<br/>

Trust none again, 'till th' have made over;                   670<br/>

Or if they do, before they marry,<br/>

The foxes weigh the geese they carry;<br/>

And e're they venture o'er a stream,<br/>

Know how to size themselves and them;<br/>

Whence wittiest ladies always choose                          675<br/>

To undertake the heaviest goose<br/>

For now the world is grown so wary,<br/>

That few of either sex dare marry,<br/>

But rather trust on tick t' amours,<br/>

The cross and pile for better or worse;                       680<br/>

A mode that is held honourable,<br/>

As well as French, and fashionable:<br/>

For when it falls out for the best,<br/>

Where both are incommoded least,<br/>

In soul and body two unite,                                   685<br/>

To make up one hermaphrodite,<br/>

Still amorous, and fond, and billing,<br/>

Like PHILIP and MARY on a shilling,<br/>

Th' have more punctilios and capriches<br/>

Between the petticoat and breeches,                           690<br/>

More petulant extravagances,<br/>

Than poets make 'em in romances.<br/>

Though when their heroes 'spouse the dames,<br/>

We hear no more charms and flames:<br/>

For then their late attracts decline,                         695<br/>

And turn as eager as prick'd wine;<br/>

And all their catterwauling tricks,<br/>

In earnest to as jealous piques;<br/>

Which the ancients wisely signify'd,<br/>

By th' yellow mantos of the bride:                            700<br/>

For jealousy is but a kind<br/>

Of clap and grincam of the mind,<br/>

The natural effects of love,<br/>

As other flames and aches prove;<br/>

But all the mischief is, the doubt                            705<br/>

On whose account they first broke out.<br/>

For though &lt;n&gt; Chineses go to bed,<br/>

And lie in, in their ladies stead,<br/>

And for the pains they took before,<br/>

Are nurs'd and pamper'd to do more                            710<br/>

Our green men do it worse, when th' hap<br/>

To fail in labour of a clap<br/>

Both lay the child to one another:<br/>

But who's the father, who the mother,<br/>

'Tis hard to say in multitudes,                               715<br/>

Or who imported the French goods.<br/>

But health and sickness b'ing all one,<br/>

Which both engag'd before to own,<br/>

And are not with their bodies bound<br/>

To worship, only when they're sound,                          720<br/>

Both give and take their equal shares<br/>

Of all they suffer by false wares:<br/>

A fate no lover can divert<br/>

With all his caution, wit, and art.<br/>

For 'tis in vain to think to guess                            725<br/>

At women by appearances,<br/>

That paint and patch their imperfections<br/>

Of intellectual complexions,<br/>

And daub their tempers o'er with washes<br/>

As artificial as their faces;                                 730<br/>

Wear under vizard-masks their talents<br/>

And mother-wits before their gallants,<br/>

Until they're hamper'd in the noose,<br/>

Too fast to dream of breaking loose;<br/>

When all the flaws they strove to hide                        735<br/>

Are made unready with the bride,<br/>

That with her wedding-clothes undresses<br/>

Her complaisance and gentilesses,<br/>

Tries all her arts to take upon her<br/>

The government from th' easy owner;                           740<br/>

Until the wretch is glad to wave<br/>

His lawful right, and turn her slave;<br/>

Find all his having, and his holding,<br/>

Reduc'd t' eternal noise and scolding;<br/>

The conjugal petard, that tears                               745<br/>

Down all portcullises of ears,<br/>

And make the volley of one tongue<br/>

For all their leathern shields too strong<br/>

When only arm'd with noise and nails,<br/>

The female silk-worms ride the males,                         750<br/>

&lt;o&gt; Transform 'em into rams and goats,<br/>

Like Sirens, with their charming notes;<br/>

Sweet as a screech-owl's serenade,<br/>

Or those enchanting murmurs made<br/>

By th' husband &lt;p&gt; mandrake and the wife,                     755<br/>

Both  bury'd (like themselves) alive.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00419">Quoth he, These reasons are but strains<br/>

Of wanton, over-heated brains<br/>

Which ralliers, in their wit, or drink,<br/>

Do rather wheedle with than think                             760<br/>

Man was not man in paradise,<br/>

Until he was created twice,<br/>

And had his better half, his bride,<br/>

Carv'd from the original, his side,<br/>

T' amend his natural defects,                                 765<br/>

And perfect his recruited sex;<br/>

Inlarge his breed at once, and lessen<br/>

The pains and labour of increasing,<br/>

By changing them for other cares,<br/>

As by his dry'd-up paps appears.                              770<br/>

His body, that stupendous frame,<br/>

Of all the world the anagram<br/>

Is of two equal parts compact,<br/>

In shape and symmetry exact,<br/>

Of which the left and female side                             775<br/>

Is to the manly right a bride;<br/>

Both join'd together with such art,<br/>

That nothing else but death can part.<br/>

Those heav'nly attracts of yours, your eyes,<br/>

And face, that all the world surprize,                        780<br/>

That dazzle all that look upon ye,<br/>

And scorch all other ladies tawny,<br/>

Those ravishing and charming graces<br/>

Are all made up of two half faces,<br/>

That in a mathematick line,                                   785<br/>

Like those in other heavens, join,<br/>

Of which if either grew alone,<br/>

T' would fright as much to look upon:<br/>

And so would that sweet bud your lip,<br/>

Without the other's fellowship.                               790<br/>

Our noblest senses act by pairs;<br/>

Two eyes to see; to hear, two ears;<br/>

Th' intelligencers of the mind,<br/>

To wait upon the soul design'd,<br/>

But those that serve the body alone,                          795<br/>

Are single, and confin'd to one.<br/>

The &lt;q&gt; world is but two parts, that meet<br/>

And close at th' equinoctial fit;<br/>

And so are all the works of nature,<br/>

Stamp'd with her signature on matter,                         800<br/>

Which all her creatures, to a leaf,<br/>

Or smallest blade of grass receive;<br/>

All which sufficiently declare,<br/>

How entirely marriage is her care,<br/>

The only method that she uses                                 805<br/>

In all the wonders she produces:<br/>

And those that take their rules from her,<br/>

Can never be deceiv'd, nor err.<br/>

For what secures the civil life,<br/>

But pawns of children, and a wife?                            810<br/>

That lie like hostages at stake,<br/>

To pay for all men undertake;<br/>

To whom it is as necessary<br/>

As to be born and breathe, to marry;<br/>

So universal all mankind,                                     815<br/>

In nothing else, is of one mind.<br/>

For in what stupid age, or nation,<br/>

Was marriage ever out of fashion?<br/>

Unless among the &lt;r&gt; Amazons,<br/>

Or cloister'd friars, and vestal nuns;                        820<br/>

Or Stoicks, who to bar the freaks<br/>

And loose excesses of the sex,<br/>

Prepost'rously wou'd have all women<br/>

Turn'd up to all the world in common.<br/>

Though men would find such mortal feuds,                      825<br/>

In sharing of their publick goods,<br/>

'Twould put them to more charge of lives,<br/>

Than they're supply'd with now by wives;<br/>

Until they graze, and wear their clothes,<br/>

As beasts do, of their native growths:                        830<br/>

For simple wearing of their horns<br/>

Will not suffice to serve their turns.<br/>

For what can we pretend t' inherit,<br/>

Unless the marriage-deed will bear it?<br/>

Could claim no right, to lands or rents,                      835<br/>

But for our parents' settlements;<br/>

Had been but younger sons o' th' earth,<br/>

Debarr'd it all, but for our birth.<br/>

What honours or estates of peers,<br/>

Cou'd be preserv'd but by their heirs                         840<br/>

And what security maintains<br/>

Their right and title, but the banes?<br/>

What crowns could be hereditary,<br/>

If greatest monarchs did not marry.<br/>

And with their consorts consummate                            845<br/>

Their weightiest interests of state?<br/>

For all the amours of princes are<br/>

But guarantees of peace or war,<br/>

Or what but marriage has a charm<br/>

The rage of empires to disarm,                                850<br/>

Make blood and desolation cease,<br/>

And fire and sword unite in peace,<br/>

When all their fierce contest for forage<br/>

Conclude in articles of marriage?<br/>

Nor does the genial bed provide                               855<br/>

Less for the int'rests of the bride;<br/>

Who else had not the least pretence<br/>

T' as much as due benevolence;<br/>

Could no more title take upon her<br/>

To virtue, quality, and honour.                               860<br/>

Than ladies-errant, unconfin'd,<br/>

And feme-coverts t' all mankind<br/>

All women would be of one piece,<br/>

The virtuous matron and the miss;<br/>

The nymphs of chaste &lt;s&gt; Diana's train,                       865<br/>

The same with those in &lt;t&gt; LEWKNER's Lane;<br/>

But for the difference marriage makes<br/>

'Twixt wives and ladies of the lakes;<br/>

Besides the joys of place and birth,<br/>

The sex's paradise on earth;                                  870<br/>

A privilege so sacred held,<br/>

That none will to their mothers yield;<br/>

But rather than not go before,<br/>

Abandon Heaven at the door.<br/>

And if th' indulgent law allows                               875<br/>

A greater freedom to the spouse,<br/>

The &lt;u&gt; reason is, because the wife<br/>

Runs greater hazards of her life;<br/>

Is trusted with the form and matter<br/>

Of all mankind by careful nature;                             880<br/>

Where man brings nothing but the stuff<br/>

She frames the wond'rous fabric of;<br/>

Who therefore, in a streight, may freely<br/>

Demand the clergy of her belly,<br/>

And make it save her the same way                             885<br/>

It seldom misses to betray;<br/>

Unless both parties wisely enter<br/>

Into the liturgy indenture,<br/>

And though some fits of small contest<br/>

Sometimes fall out among the best,                            890<br/>

That is no more than ev'ry lover<br/>

Does from his hackney-lady suffer;<br/>

That makes no breach of faith and love,<br/>

But rather (sometimes) serves t' improve.<br/>

For as in running, ev'ry pace                                 895<br/>

Is but between two legs a race,<br/>

In which both do their uttermost<br/>

To get before, and win the post,<br/>

Yet when they're at their race's ends,<br/>

They're still as kind and constant friends,                   900<br/>

And, to relieve their weariness,<br/>

By turns give one another ease;<br/>

So all those false alarms of strife<br/>

Between the husband and the wife,<br/>

And little quarrels, often prove                              905<br/>

To be but new recruits of love;<br/>

When those wh' are always kind or coy,<br/>

In time must either tire or cloy.<br/>

Nor are their loudest clamours more,<br/>

Than as they're relish'd, sweet or sour;                      910<br/>

Like musick, that proves bad or good;<br/>

According as 'tis understood.<br/>

In all amours, a lover burns<br/>

With frowns as well as smiles by turns;<br/>

And hearts have been as aft with sullen                       915<br/>

As charming looks surpriz'd and stolen.<br/>

Then why should more bewitching clamour<br/>

Some lovers not as much enamour?<br/>

For discords make the sweetest airs<br/>

And curses are a kind of pray'rs;                             920<br/>

Too slight alloys for all those grand<br/>

Felicities by marriage gain'd.<br/>

For nothing else has pow'r to settle<br/>

Th' interests of love perpetual;<br/>

An act and deed, that that makes one heart                    925<br/>

Becomes another's counter-part,<br/>

And passes fines on faith and love,<br/>

Inroll'd and register'd above,<br/>

To seal the slippery knots of vows,<br/>

Which nothing else but death can loose.                       930<br/>

And what security's too strong,<br/>

To guard that gentle heart from wrong,<br/>

That to its friend is glad to pass<br/>

Itself away, and all it has;<br/>

And, like an anchorite, gives over                            935<br/>

This world for th' heaven of lover?<br/>

I grant (quoth she) there are some few<br/>

Who take that course, and find it true<br/>

But millions whom the same does sentence<br/>

To heav'n b' another way — repentance.                       940<br/>

Love's arrows are but shot at rovers;<br/>

Though all they hit, they turn to lovers;<br/>

And all the weighty consequents<br/>

Depend upon more blind events,<br/>

Than gamesters, when they play a set                          945<br/>

With greatest cunning at piquet,<br/>

Put out with caution, but take in<br/>

They know not what, unsight, unseen,<br/>

For what do lovers, when they're fast<br/>

In one another's arms embrac't,                               950<br/>

But strive to plunder, and convey<br/>

Each other, like a prize, away?<br/>

To change the property of selves,<br/>

As sucking children are by elves?<br/>

And if they use their persons so,                             955<br/>

What will they to their fortunes do?<br/>

Their fortunes! the perpetual aims<br/>

Of all their extasies and flames.<br/>

For when the money's on the book,<br/>

And, All my worldly goods — but spoke,                       960<br/>

(The formal livery and seisin<br/>

That puts a lover in possession,)<br/>

To that alone the bridegroom's wedded;<br/>

The bride a flam, that's superseded.<br/>

To that their faith is still made good,                       965<br/>

And all the oaths to us they vow'd:<br/>

For when we once resign our pow'rs,<br/>

W' have nothing left we can call ours:<br/>

Our money's now become the Miss<br/>

Of all your lives and services;                               970<br/>

And we forsaken, and postpon'd;<br/>

But bawds to what before we own'd;<br/>

Which, as it made y' at first gallant us,<br/>

So now hires others to supplant us,<br/>

Until 'tis all turn'd out of doors,                           975<br/>

(As we had been) for new amours;<br/>

For what did ever heiress yet<br/>

By being born to lordships get?<br/>

When the more lady sh' is of manours,<br/>

She's but expos'd to more trepanners,                         980<br/>

Pays for their projects and designs,<br/>

And for her own destruction fines;<br/>

And does but tempt them with her riches,<br/>

To use her as the Dev'l does witches;<br/>

Who takes it for a special grace                              985<br/>

To be their cully for a space,<br/>

That when the time's expir'd, the drazels<br/>

For ever may become his vassals:<br/>

So she, bewitch'd by rooks and spirits,<br/>

Betrays herself, and all sh' inherits;                        990<br/>

Is bought and sold, like stolen goods,<br/>

By pimps, and match-makers, and bawds,<br/>

Until they force her to convey,<br/>

And steal the thief himself away.<br/>

These are the everlasting fruits                              995<br/>

Of all your passionate love-suits,<br/>

Th' effects of all your amorous fancies<br/>

To portions and inheritances;<br/>

Your love-sick rapture for fruition<br/>

Of dowry, jointure, and tuition;                             1000<br/>

To which you make address and courtship;<br/>

Ad with your bodies strive to worship,<br/>

That th' infants' fortunes may partake<br/>

Of love too, for the mother's sake.<br/>

For these you play at purposes,                              1005<br/>

And love your love's with A's and B's:<br/>

For these at Beste and L'Ombre woo,<br/>

And play for love and money too;<br/>

Strive who shall be the ablest man<br/>

At right gallanting of a fan;                                1010<br/>

And who the most genteelly bred<br/>

At sucking of a vizard-head;<br/>

How best t' accost us in all quarters;<br/>

T' our question — and — command new Garters<br/>

And solidly discourse upon                                   1015<br/>

All sorts of dresses, Pro and Con.<br/>

For there's no mystery nor trade,<br/>

But in the art of love is made:<br/>

And when you have more debts to pay<br/>

Than Michaelmas and Lady-Day,                                1020<br/>

And no way possible to do't,<br/>

But love and oaths, and restless suit,<br/>

To us y' apply to pay the scores<br/>

Of all your cully'd, past amours;<br/>

Act o'er your flames and darts again,                        1025<br/>

And charge us with your wounds and pain;<br/>

Which others influences long since<br/>

Have charm'd your noses with and shins;<br/>

For which the surgeon is unpaid,<br/>

And like to be, without our aid.                             1030<br/>

Lord! what an am'rous thing is want!<br/>

How debts and mortgages inchant!<br/>

What graces must that lady have<br/>

That can from executions save!<br/>

What charms that can reverse extent,                         1035<br/>

And null decree and exigent!<br/>

What magical attracts and graces,<br/>

That can redeem from Scire facias!<br/>

From bonds and statutes can discharge,<br/>

And from contempts of courts enlarge!                        1040<br/>

These are the highest excellencies<br/>

Of all your true or false pretences:<br/>

And you would damn yourselves, and swear<br/>

As much t' an hostess dowager,<br/>

Grown fat and pursy by retail                                1045<br/>

Of pots of beer and bottled ale;<br/>

And find her fitter for your turn;<br/>

For fat is wondrous apt to burn;<br/>

Who at your flames would soon take fire,<br/>

Relent, and melt to your desire,                             1050<br/>

And like a candle in the socket,<br/>

Dissolve her graces int' your pocket.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00420">By this time 'twas grown dark and late,<br/>

When they heard a knocking at the gate,<br/>

Laid on in haste with such a powder,                         1055<br/>

The blows grew louder still and louder;<br/>

Which HUDIBRAS, as if th' had been<br/>

Bestow'd as freely on his skin,<br/>

Expounding, by his inward light,<br/>

Or rather more prophetick fright,                            1060<br/>

To be the Wizard, come to search,<br/>

And take him napping in the lurch<br/>

Turn'd pale as ashes or a clout;<br/>

But why or wherefore is a doubt<br/>

For men will tremble, and turn paler,                        1065<br/>

With too much or too little valour.<br/>

His heart laid on, as if it try'd<br/>

To force a passage through his side,<br/>

Impatient (as he vow'd) to wait 'em,<br/>

But in a fury to fly at 'em;                                 1070<br/>

And therefore beat, and laid about,<br/>

To find a cranny to creep out.<br/>

But she, who saw in what a taking<br/>

The Knight was by his furious quaking,<br/>

Undaunted cry'd, Courage, Sir Knight;                        1075<br/>

Know, I'm resolv'd to break no rite<br/>

Of hospitality t' a stranger;<br/>

But, to secure you out of danger,<br/>

Will here myself stand sentinel,<br/>

To guard this pass 'gainst SIDROPHEL.                        1080<br/>

Women, you know, do seldom fail<br/>

To make the stoutest men turn tail;<br/>

And bravely scorn to turn their backs<br/>

Upon the desp'ratest attacks.<br/>

At this the Knight grew resolute                             1085<br/>

As &lt;w&gt; IRONSIDE and HARDIKNUTE<br/>

His fortitude began to rally,<br/>

And out he cry'd aloud to sally.<br/>

But she besought him to convey<br/>

His courage rather out o' th' way,                           1090<br/>

And lodge in ambush on the floor,<br/>

Or fortify'd behind a door;<br/>

That if the enemy shou'd enter,<br/>

He might relieve her in th' adventure.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00421">Mean while they knock'd against the door                     1095<br/>

As fierce as at the gate before,<br/>

Which made the Renegado Knight<br/>

Relapse again t' his former fright.<br/>

He thought it desperate to stay<br/>

Till th' enemy had forc'd his way,                           1100<br/>

But rather post himself, to serve<br/>

The lady, for a fresh reserve<br/>

His duty was not to dispute,<br/>

But what sh' had order'd execute;<br/>

Which he resolv'd in haste t' obey,                          1105<br/>

And therefore stoutly march'd away;<br/>

And all h' encounter'd fell upon,<br/>

Though in the dark, and all alone;<br/>

Till fear, that braver feats performs<br/>

Than ever courage dar'd in arms,                             1110<br/>

Had drawn him up before a pass<br/>

To stand upon his guard, and face:<br/>

This he courageously invaded,<br/>

And having enter'd, barricado'd,<br/>

Insconc'd himself as formidable                              1115<br/>

As could be underneath a table,<br/>

Where he lay down in ambush close,<br/>

T' expect th' arrival of his foes.<br/>

Few minutes he had lain perdue,<br/>

To guard his desp'rate avenue,                               1120<br/>

Before he heard a dreadful shout,<br/>

As loud as putting to the rout,<br/>

With which impatiently alarm'd,<br/>

He fancy'd th' enemy had storm'd,<br/>

And, after ent'ring, SIDROPHEL                               1125<br/>

Was fall'n upon the guards pell-mell<br/>

He therefore sent out all his senses,<br/>

To bring him in intelligences,<br/>

Which vulgars, out of ignorance,<br/>

Mistake for falling in a trance;                             1130<br/>

But those that trade in geomancy,<br/>

Affirm to be the strength of fancy;<br/>

In which the &lt;x&gt; Lapland Magi deal,<br/>

And things incredible reveal.<br/>

Mean while the foe beat up his quarters,                     1135<br/>

And storm'd the out-works of his fortress:<br/>

And as another, of the same<br/>

Degree and party, in arms and fame,<br/>

That in the same cause had engag'd,<br/>

At war with equal conduct wag'd,                             1140<br/>

By vent'ring only but to thrust<br/>

His head a span beyond his post,<br/>

B' a gen'ral of the cavaliers<br/>

Was dragg'd thro' a window by th' ears;<br/>

So he was serv'd in his redoubt,                             1145<br/>

And by the other end pull'd out.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00422">Soon as they had him at their mercy,<br/>

They put him to the cudgel fiercely,<br/>

As if they'd scorn'd to trade or barter,<br/>

By giving or by taking quarter:                              1150<br/>

They stoutly on his quarters laid,<br/>

Until his scouts came in t' his aid.<br/>

For when a man is past his sense,<br/>

There's no way to reduce him thence,<br/>

But twinging him by th' ears or nose,                        1155<br/>

Or laying on of heavy blows;<br/>

And if that will not do the deed,<br/>

To &lt;y&gt; burning with hot irons proceed.<br/>

No sooner was he come t' himself,<br/>

But on his neck a sturdy elf                                 1160<br/>

Clapp'd, in a trice, his cloven hoof,<br/>

And thus attack'd him with reproof;<br/>

Mortal, thou art betray'd to us<br/>

B' our friend, thy Evil Genius,<br/>

Who, for thy horrid perjuries,                               1165<br/>

Thy breach of faith, and turning lies,<br/>

The Brethren's privilege (against<br/>

The wicked) on themselves, the Saints,<br/>

Has here thy wretched carcase sent<br/>

For just revenge and punishment;                             1170<br/>

Which thou hast now no way to lessen,<br/>

But by an open, free confession;<br/>

For if we catch thee failing once,<br/>

'Twill fall the heavier on thy bones.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00423">What made thee venture to betray,                            1175<br/>

And filch the lady's heart away?<br/>

To Spirit her to matrimony? —<br/>

That which contracts all matches — money.<br/>

It was th' inchantment oft her riches<br/>

That made m' apply t' your croney witches,                   1180<br/>

That, in return, wou'd pay th' expence,<br/>

The wear and tear of conscience;<br/>

Which I cou'd have patch'd up, and turn'd,<br/>

For the hundredth part of what I earn'd.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00424">Didst thou not love her then? Speak true.                    1185<br/>

No more (quoth he) than I love you. —<br/>

How would'st th' have us'd her, and her money? —<br/>

First turn'd her up to alimony;<br/>

And laid her dowry out in law,<br/>

To null her jointure with a flaw,                            1190<br/>

Which I before-hand had agreed<br/>

T' have put, on purpose in the deed;<br/>

And bar her widow's making over<br/>

T' a friend in trust, or private lover.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00425">What made thee pick and chuse her out,                       1195<br/>

T' employ their sorceries about? —<br/>

That which makes gamesters play with those<br/>

Who have least wit, and most to lose.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00426">But didst thou scourge thy vessel thus,<br/>

As thou hast damn'd thyself to us?                           1200<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00427">I see you take me for an ass:<br/>

'Tis true, I thought the trick wou'd pass<br/>

Upon a woman well enough,<br/>

As 't has been often found by proof,<br/>

Whose humours are not to be won,                             1205<br/>

But when they are impos'd upon.<br/>

For love approves of all they do<br/>

That stand for candidates, and woo.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00428">Why didst thou forge those shameful lies<br/>

Of bears and witches in disguise?                            1210<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00429">That is no more than authors give<br/>

The rabble credit to believe:<br/>

A trick of following their leaders,<br/>

To entertain their gentle readers;<br/>

And we have now no other way                                 1215<br/>

Of passing all we do or say<br/>

Which, when 'tis natural and true,<br/>

Will be believ'd b' a very few,<br/>

Beside the danger of offence,<br/>

The fatal enemy of sense.                                    1220<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00430">Why did thou chuse that cursed sin,<br/>

Hypocrisy, to set up in?<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00431">Because it is in the thriving'st calling,<br/>

The only Saints-bell that rings all in;<br/>

In which all churches are concern'd,                         1225<br/>

And is the easiest to be learn'd:<br/>

For no degrees, unless th' employ't,<br/>

Can ever gain much, or enjoy't:<br/>

A gift that is not only able<br/>

To domineer among the rabble,                                1230<br/>

But by the laws impower'd to rout,<br/>

And awe the greatest that stand out;<br/>

Which few hold forth against, for fear<br/>

Their hands should slip, and come too near;<br/>

For no sin else among the Saints                             1235<br/>

Is taught so tenderly against.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00432">What made thee break thy plighted vows? —<br/>

That which makes others break a house,<br/>

And hang, and scorn ye all, before<br/>

Endure the plague of being poor.                             1240<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00433">Quoth he, I see you have more tricks<br/>

Than all your doating politicks,<br/>

That are grown old, and out of fashion,<br/>

Compar'd with your New Reformation;<br/>

That we must come to school to you,                          1245<br/>

To learn your more refin'd, and new.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00434">Quoth he, If you will give me leave<br/>

To tell you what I now perceive,<br/>

You'll find yourself an arrant chouse,<br/>

If y' were but at a Meeting-House. —                        1250<br/>

'Tis true, quoth he, we ne'er come there,<br/>

Because, w' have let 'em out by th' year.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00435">Truly, quoth he, you can't imagine<br/>

What wond'rous things they will engage in<br/>

That as your fellow-fiends in Hell                           1255<br/>

Were angels all before they fell,<br/>

So are you like to be agen,<br/>

Compar'd with th' angels of us men.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00436">Quoth he, I am resolv'd to be<br/>

Thy scholar in this mystery;                                 1260<br/>

And therefore first desire to know<br/>

Some principles on which you go.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00437">What makes a knave a child of God,<br/>

And one of us? — A livelihood.<br/>

What renders beating out of brains,                          1265<br/>

And murder, godliness? — Great gains.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00438">What's tender conscience? — 'Tis a botch,<br/>

That will not bear the gentlest touch;<br/>

But breaking out, dispatches more<br/>

Than th' epidemical'st plague-sore.                          1270<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00439">What makes y' encroach upon our trade,<br/>

And damn all others?  — To be paid.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00440">What's orthodox, and true, believing<br/>

Against a conscience? — A good living.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00441">What makes rebelling against Kings                           1275<br/>

A Good Old Cause? — Administrings.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00442">What makes all doctrines plain and clear? —<br/>

About two hundred pounds a year.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00443">And that which was prov'd true before,<br/>

Prove false again? — Two hundred more.                      1280<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00444">What makes the breaking of all oaths<br/>

A holy duty? — Food and cloaths.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00445">What laws and freedom, persecution? —<br/>

B'ing out of pow'r, and contribution.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00446">What makes a church a den of thieves? —                     1285<br/>

A dean and chapter, and white sleeves.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00447">Ad what would serve, if those were gone,<br/>

To make it orthodox? — Our own.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00448">What makes morality a crime,<br/>

The most notorious of the time;                              1290<br/>

Morality, which both the Saints,<br/>

And wicked too, cry out against? —<br/>

Cause grace and virtue are within<br/>

Prohibited degrees of kin<br/>

And therefore no true Saint allows,                          1295<br/>

They shall be suffer'd to espouse;<br/>

For Saints can need no conscience,<br/>

That with morality dispense;<br/>

As virtue's impious, when 'tis rooted<br/>

In nature only, and not imputed                              1300<br/>

But why the wicked should do so,<br/>

We neither know, or care to do.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00449">What's liberty of conscience,<br/>

I' th' natural and genuine sense?<br/>

'Tis to restore, with more security,                         1305<br/>

Rebellion to its ancient purity;<br/>

And christian liberty reduce<br/>

To th' elder practice of the Jews.<br/>

For a large conscience is all one,<br/>

And signifies the same with none.                            1310<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00450">It is enough (quoth he) for once,<br/>

And has repriev'd thy forfeit bones:<br/>

NICK MACHIAVEL had ne'er a trick,<br/>

(Though he gave his name to our Old Nick,)<br/>

But was below the least of these,                            1315<br/>

That pass i' th' world for holiness.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00451">This said, the furies and the light<br/>

In th' instant vanish'd out of sight,<br/>

And left him in the dark alone,<br/>

With stinks of brimstone and his own.                        1320<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00452">The &lt;z&gt; Queen of Night, whose large command<br/>

Rules all the sea, and half the land,<br/>

And over moist and crazy brains,<br/>

In high spring-tides, at midnight reigns,<br/>

Was now declining to the west,                               1325<br/>

To go to bed, and take her rest;<br/>

When HUDIBRAS, whose stubborn blows<br/>

Deny'd his bones that soft repose,<br/>

Lay still expecting worse and more,<br/>

Stretch'd out at length upon the floor;                      1330<br/>

And though he shut his eyes as fast<br/>

As if h' had been to sleep his last,<br/>

Saw all the shapes that fear or wizards<br/>

Do make the Devil wear for vizards,<br/>

And pricking up his ears, to hark                            1335<br/>

If he cou'd hear too in the dark,<br/>

Was first invaded with a groan<br/>

And after in a feeble tone,<br/>

These trembling words: Unhappy wretch!<br/>

What hast thou gotten by this fetch;                         1340<br/>

For all thy tricks, in this new trade,<br/>

Thy holy brotherhood o' th' blade?<br/>

By sauntring still on some adventure,<br/>

And growing to thy horse a &lt;a&gt; Centaure?<br/>

To stuff thy skin with swelling knobs                        1345<br/>

Of cruel and hard-wooded drubs?<br/>

For still th' hast had the worst on't yet,<br/>

As well in conquest as defeat.<br/>

Night is the sabbath of mankind,<br/>

To rest the body and the mind,                               1350<br/>

Which now thou art deny'd to keep,<br/>

And cure thy labour'd corpse with sleep.<br/>

The Knight, who heard the words, explain'd,<br/>

As meant to him, this reprimand,<br/>

Because the character did hit                                1355<br/>

Point-blank upon his case so fit;<br/>

Believ'd it was some drolling spright,<br/>

That staid upon the guard that night,<br/>

And one of those h' had seen, and felt<br/>

The drubs he had so freely dealt;                            1360<br/>

When, after a short pause and groan,<br/>

The doleful Spirit thus went on:<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00453">This 'tis t' engage with dogs and bears<br/>

Pell-mell together by the ears,<br/>

And, after painful bangs and knocks,                         1365<br/>

To lie in limbo in the stocks,<br/>

And from the pinnacle of glory<br/>

Fall headlong into purgatory.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00454">(Thought he, this devil's full of malice,<br/>

That in my late disasters rallies:)                          1370<br/>

Condemn'd to whipping, but declin'd it,<br/>

By being more heroic-minded:<br/>

And at a riding handled worse,<br/>

With treats more slovenly and coarse:<br/>

Engag'd with fiends in stubborn wars,                        1375<br/>

And hot disputes with conjurers;<br/>

And when th' hadst bravely won the day,<br/>

Wast fain to steal thyself away.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00455">(I see, thought he, this shameless elf<br/>

Wou'd fain steal me too from myself,                         1380<br/>

That impudently dares to own<br/>

What I have suffer'd for and done,)<br/>

And now but vent'ring to betray,<br/>

Hast met with vengeance the same way.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00456">Thought he, how does the Devil know                          1385<br/>

What 'twas that I design'd to do?<br/>

His office of intelligence,<br/>

His oracles, are ceas'd long since;<br/>

And he knows nothing of the Saints,<br/>

But what some treacherous spy acquaints.                     1390<br/>

This is some pettifogging fiend,<br/>

Some under door-keeper's friend's friend,<br/>

That undertakes to understand,<br/>

And juggles at the second-hand;<br/>

And now would pass for Spirit Po,                            1395<br/>

And all mens' dark concerns foreknow.<br/>

I think I need not fear him for't;<br/>

These rallying devils do no hurt.<br/>

With that he rouz'd his drooping heart,<br/>

And hastily cry'd out, What art?                             1400<br/>

A wretch (quoth he) whom want of grace<br/>

Has brought to this unhappy place.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00457">I do believe thee, quoth the Knight;<br/>

Thus far I'm sure th' art in the right;<br/>

And know what 'tis that troubles thee,                       1405<br/>

Better than thou hast guess'd of me.<br/>

Thou art some paultry, black-guard spright,<br/>

Condemn'd to drudg'ry in the night<br/>

Thou hast no work to do in th' house<br/>

Nor half-penny to drop in shoes;                             1410<br/>

Without the raising of which sum,<br/>

You dare not be so troublesome,<br/>

To pinch the slatterns black and blue,<br/>

For leaving you their work to do.<br/>

This is your bus'ness good Pug-Robin;                        1415<br/>

And your diversion dull dry-bobbing,<br/>

T' entice fanaticks in the dirt,<br/>

And wash them clean in ditches for't;<br/>

Of which conceit you are so proud,<br/>

At ev'ry jest you laugh aloud,                               1420<br/>

As now you wou'd have done by me,<br/>

But that I barr'd your raillery.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00458">Sir (quoth the voice) y'are no such &lt;b&gt; Sophi<br/>

As you would have the world judge of ye.<br/>

If you design to weigh our talents                           1425<br/>

I' the standard of your own false balance,<br/>

Or think it possible to know<br/>

Us ghosts as well as we do you;<br/>

We, who have been the everlasting<br/>

Companions of your drubs and basting,                        1430<br/>

And never left you in contest,<br/>

With male or female, man or beast,<br/>

But prov'd as true t' ye, and entire,<br/>

In all adventures, as your Squire.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00459">Quoth he, That may be said as true                           1435<br/>

By the idlest pug of all your crew:<br/>

For none cou'd have betray'd us worse<br/>

Than those allies of ours and yours.<br/>

But I have sent him for a token<br/>

To your Low-Country HOGEN-MOGEN,                             1440<br/>

To whose infernal shores I hope<br/>

He'll swing like skippers in a rope.<br/>

And, if y' have been more just to me<br/>

(As I am apt to think) than he,<br/>

I am afraid it is as true,                                   1445<br/>

What th' ill-affected say of you:<br/>

Y' have spous'd the Covenant and Cause,<br/>

By holding up your cloven paws.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00460">Sir, quoth the voice, 'tis true, I grant,<br/>

We made and took the Covenant;                               1450<br/>

But that no more concerns the Cause<br/>

Than other perj'ries do the laws,<br/>

Which when they're prov'd in open court,<br/>

Wear wooden &lt;c&gt; peccadillo's for't:<br/>

And that's the reason Cov'nanters                            1455<br/>

Hold up their hands like rogues at bars.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00461">I see, quoth HUDIBRAS, from whence<br/>

These scandals of the Saints commence,<br/>

That are but natural effects<br/>

Of Satan's malice, and his sects,                            1460<br/>

Those Spider-Saints, that hang by threads,<br/>

Spun out o' th' intrails of their heads.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00462">Sir, quoth the voice, that may as true<br/>

And properly be said of you,<br/>

Whose talents may compare with either,                       1465<br/>

Or both the other put together.<br/>

For all the Independents do,<br/>

Is only what you forc'd 'em to;<br/>

You, who are not content alone<br/>

With tricks to put the Devil down,                           1470<br/>

But must have armies rais'd to back<br/>

The gospel-work you undertake;<br/>

As if artillery, and edge-tools,<br/>

Were the only engines to save souls;<br/>

While he, poor devil, has no pow'r                           1475<br/>

By force to run down and devour;<br/>

Has ne'er a Classis; cannot sentence<br/>

To stools or poundage of repentance;<br/>

Is ty'd up only to design,<br/>

T' entice, and tempt, and undermine,                         1480<br/>

In which you all his arts out-do,<br/>

And prove yourselves his betters too.<br/>

Hence 'tis &lt;d&gt; possessions do less evil<br/>

Than mere temptations of the Devil,<br/>

Which, all the horrid'st actions done,                       1485<br/>

Are charg'd in courts of law upon;<br/>

Because unless they help the elf,<br/>

He can do little of himself;<br/>

And therefore where he's best possess'd<br/>

Acts most against his interest;                              1490<br/>

Surprizes none, but those wh' have priests<br/>

To turn him out, and exorcists,<br/>

Supply'd with spiritual provision,<br/>

And magazines of ammunition<br/>

With crosses, relicks, crucifixes,                           1495<br/>

Beads, pictures, rosaries, and pixes;<br/>

The tools of working our salvation<br/>

By mere mechanick operation;<br/>

With holy water, like a sluice,<br/>

To overflow all avenues.                                     1500<br/>

But those wh' are utterly unarm'd<br/>

T' oppose his entrance, if he storm'd,<br/>

He never offers to surprize,<br/>

Although his falsest enemies;<br/>

But is content to be their drudge,                           1505<br/>

And on their errands glad to trudge<br/>

For where are all your forfeitures<br/>

Entrusted in safe hands but ours?<br/>

Who are but jailors of the holes,                            1510<br/>

And dungeons where you clap up souls;<br/>

Like under-keepers, turn the keys,<br/>

T' your mittimus anathemas;<br/>

And never boggle to restore<br/>

The members you deliver o're<br/>

Upon demand, with fairer justice                             1515<br/>

Than all your covenanting Trustees;<br/>

Unless to punish them the worse,<br/>

You put them in the secular pow'rs,<br/>

And pass their souls, as some demise<br/>

The same estate in mortgage twice;                           1520<br/>

When to a legal &lt;e&gt; Utlegation<br/>

You turn your excommunication,<br/>

And for a groat unpaid, that's due,<br/>

&lt;f&gt; Distrain on soul and body too.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00463">Thought he, 'tis no mean part of civil                       1525<br/>

State prudence to cajole the Devil<br/>

And not to handle him too rough,<br/>

When h' has us in his cloven hoof.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00464">T' is true, quoth he, that intercourse<br/>

Has pass'd between your friends and ours;                    1530<br/>

That as you trust us, in our way,<br/>

To raise your members, and to lay,<br/>

We send you others of our own,<br/>

Denounc'd to hang themselves or drown;<br/>

Or, frighted with our oratory,                               1435<br/>

To leap down headlong many a story<br/>

Have us'd all means to propagate<br/>

Your mighty interests of state;<br/>

Laid out our spiritual gifts to further<br/>

Your great designs of rage and murther.                      1540<br/>

For if the Saints are nam'd from blood,<br/>

We only have made that title good;<br/>

And if it were but in our power,<br/>

We should not scruple to do more,<br/>

And not be half a soul behind                                1545<br/>

Of all dissenters of mankind.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00465">Right, quoth the voice, and as I scorn<br/>

To be ungrateful, in return<br/>

Of all those kind good offices,<br/>

I'll free you out of this distress,                          1550<br/>

And set you down in safety, where<br/>

It is no time to tell you here.<br/>

The cock crows, and the morn grows on,<br/>

When 'tis decreed I must be gone;<br/>

And if I leave you here till day,                            1555<br/>

You'll find it hard to get away.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00466">With that the Spirit grop'd about,<br/>

To find th' inchanted hero out,<br/>

And try'd with haste to lift him up;<br/>

But found his forlorn hope, his crup,                        1560<br/>

Unserviceable with kicks and blows,<br/>

Receiv'd from harden'd-hearted foes.<br/>

He thought to drag him by the heels,<br/>

Like Gresham carts, with legs for wheels;<br/>

But fear, that soonest cures those sores                     1565<br/>

In danger of relapse to worse,<br/>

Came in t' assist him with it's aid<br/>

And up his sinking vessel weigh'd.<br/>

No sooner was he fit to trudge,<br/>

But both made ready to dislodge.                             1570<br/>

The Spirit hors'd him like a sack<br/>

Upon the vehicle his back;<br/>

And bore him headlong into th' hall,<br/>

With some few rubs against the wall<br/>

Where finding out the postern lock'd,                        1575<br/>

And th' avenues as strongly block'd,<br/>

H' attack'd the window, storm'd the glass,<br/>

And in a moment gain'd the pass;<br/>

Thro' which he dragg'd the worsted souldier's<br/>

Fore-quarters out by the head and shoulders;                 1580<br/>

And cautiously began to scout,<br/>

To find their fellow-cattle out.<br/>

Nor was it half a minute's quest,<br/>

E're he retriev'd the champion's beast,<br/>

Ty'd to a pale, instead of rack;                             1585<br/>

But ne'er a saddle on his back,<br/>

Nor pistols at the saddle-bow,<br/>

Convey'd away the Lord knows how,<br/>

He thought it was no time to stay,<br/>

And let the night too steal away;                            1590<br/>

But in a trice advanc'd the Knight<br/>

Upon the bare ridge, bolt upright:<br/>

And groping out for RALPHO's jade,<br/>

He found the saddle too was stray'd,<br/>

And in the place a lump of soap,                             1595<br/>

On which he speedily leap'd up;<br/>

And turning to the gate the rein,<br/>

He kick'd and cudgell'd on amain.<br/>

While HUDIBRAS, with equal haste,<br/>

On both sides laid about as fast,                            1600<br/>

And spurr'd as jockies use to break,<br/>

Or padders to secure, a neck<br/>

Where let us leave 'em for a time,<br/>

And to their Churches turn our rhyme;<br/>

To hold forth their declining state,                         1605<br/>

Which now come near an even rate.<br/>
</p>

<h3 id="id00467" style="margin-top: 3em">NOTES TO PART III. CANTO 1.</h3>

<p id="id00468" style="margin-top: 2em">15 a And more, &amp;c.] Caligula was one of the Emperors of
Rome, son of Germanicus and Agrippina. He would needs pass
for a god, and had the heads of the ancient statues of the gods
taken off; and his own placed on in their stead; and used to
stand between the statues of Castor and Pollux to be
worshipped; and often bragged of lying with the Moon.</p>

<p id="id00469">43 b And us'd &amp;c.] Philters were love potions, reported to be
much in request in former ages; but our true Knight-Errant Hero
made use of no other but what his noble atchievements by his
sword produced.</p>

<p id="id00470">52 c To th' Ordeal, &amp;c.] Ordeal trials were, when supposed
criminals, to discover their innocence, went over several red-hot
coulter irons. These were generally such whose chastity was
suspected, as the vestal virgins, &amp;c.</p>

<p id="id00471">93 d So Spanish Heroes, &amp;c.] The young Spaniards signalize
their valour before the Spanish ladies at bull feasts, which often
prove very hazardous, and sometimes fatal to them. It is
performed by attacking of a wild bull, kept on purpose, and let
loose at the combatant; and he that kills most, carries the laurel,
and dwells highest in the ladies' favour.</p>

<p id="id00472">137 e To pawn, &amp;c.] His exterior ears were gone before, and so
out of danger; but by inward ears is here meant his conscience.</p>

<p id="id00473">252 f Loud as, &amp;c.] Stentrophon: A speaking trumpet, by which
the voice may be heard at a great distance, very useful at sea.</p>

<p id="id00474">276 g As if th' had, &amp;c.] This alludes to some abject letchers,
who used to be disciplined with amorous lashes by their
mistresses.</p>

<p id="id00475">323 h Bewitch Hermetick Men, &amp;c.] Hermes Trismegistus, an
Egyptian Philosopher, and said to have lived Anno Mundi 2076,
in the reign of Ninus, after Moses. He was a wonderful
philosopher and proved that there was but one God, the creator
of all things; and was the author of several most excellent and
useful inventions. But those Hermetick Men here mentioned,
though the pretended sectators of this great man, are nothing
else but a wild and extravagant sort of enthusiasts, who make a
hodge-podge of Religion and Philosophy, and produce nothing
but what is the object of every considering person's contempt.</p>

<p id="id00476">326 i Potosi.] Potosi is a city of Peru, the mountains whereof
afford great quantities of the finest silver in all the Indies.</p>

<p id="id00477">603 k More wretched, &amp;c.] Villainage was an antient tenure, by
which the tenants were obliged to perform the most abject and
slavish services for their lords.</p>

<p id="id00478">639 l Like Indian Widows, &amp;c.] The Indian women, richly
attired, are carried in a splendid and pompous machine to the
funeral pile where the bodies of their deceased husbands are to
be consumed, and there voluntarily throw themselves into it,
and expire; and such as refuse, their virtue is ever after
suspected, and they live in the utmost contempt.</p>

<p id="id00479">647 m For as the Pythagorean, &amp;c.] It was the opinion of
Pythogoras and his followers, that, the soul transmigrated (as
they termed it) into all the diverse species of animals; and so
was differently disposed and affected, according to their
different natures and constitutions.</p>

<p id="id00480">707 n For tho' Chineses, &amp;c.] The Chinese men of quality, when
their wives are brought to bed, are nursed and tended with as
much care as women here, and are supplied with the best
strengthening and nourishing diet, in order to qualify them for
future services.</p>

<p id="id00481">751 o Transform them into Rams, &amp;c.] The Sirens according to
the poets, were three sea-monsters, half women and half fish:
their names were Parthenope, Lignea and Leucosia. Their usual
residence was about the island of Sicily, where, by the charming
melody of their voices, they used to detain those that heard
them, and then transform them into some sort of brute animals.</p>

<p id="id00482">755  p By the Husband Mandrake, &amp;c.] Naturalists report, that
if a male and female Mandrake lie near each other, there will
often be heard a sort of murmuring noise.</p>

<p id="id00483">797 q The World is but two Parts, &amp;c.] The equinoctial divides
the globe into North and South.</p>

<p id="id00484">819 r Unless among the Amazons, &amp;c.] The Amazons were
women of Scythia, of heroick and great atchievements. They
suffered no men to live among them; but once every year used
to have conversation with men, of the neighbouring countries,
by which if they had a male child, they presently either killed or
crippled it; but if a female, they brought it up to the use of arms,
and burnt off one breast, leaving the other to suckle girls.</p>

<p id="id00485">865 s The Nymphs of chaste Diana's &amp;c.] Diana's Nymphs, all
of whom vowed perpetual virginity, and were much celebrated
for the exact observation of their vow.</p>

<p id="id00486">866 t Lewkner's Lane.] Some years ago swarmed with
notoriously lascivious and profligate strumpets.</p>

<p id="id00487">877 u The Reason of it is &amp;c.] Demanding the clergy of her
belly, which, for the reasons aforesaid, is pleaded in excuse by
those who take the liberty to oblige themselves and friends.</p>

<p id="id00488">1086 w As IRONSIDE or HARDIKNUTE, &amp;c.] Two famous
and valiant princes of this country; the one a Saxon, the other a
Dane.</p>

<p id="id00489">1131 x But those that trade in Geomancy, &amp;c.] The Lapland
Magi. The Laplanders are an idolatrous people, far North: and it
is very credibly reported, by authors and persons that have
travelled in their country, that they do perform things incredible
by what is vulgarly called Magick.</p>

<p id="id00490">1158 y To burning with, &amp;c.] An allusion to cauterizing in
apoplexies, &amp;c.</p>

<p id="id00491">1321 z The Queen of Night, &amp;c.] The moon influences the
tides, and predominates over all humid bodies; and persons
distempered in mind are called Lunaticks.</p>

<p id="id00492">1344 a And growing to thy Horse, &amp;c.] The Centaurs were a
people of Thessaly, and supposed to be the first managers of
horses; and the neighbouring inhabitants never having seen any
such thing before, fabulously reported them monsters, half men
and half horses.</p>

<p id="id00493">1423 b Sir (quoth the Voice) &amp;c.] Sophi is at present the name
of the kings of Persia, not superadded, as Pharaoh was to the
kings of Egypt, but the name of the family itself, and religion of
Hali; whose descendants by Fatimas, Mahomet's daughter, took
the name of Sophi.</p>

<p id="id00494">1451 c Wear wooden Peccadillos &amp;c.] Peccadillos were stiff
pieces that went about the neck; and round about the shoulders,
to pin the band, worn by persons nice in dressing; his wooden
one is a pillory.</p>

<p id="id00495">1483 d Hence 'tis Possessions, &amp;c.] Criminals, in their
indictments, are charged with not having the fear of God before
their eyes, but being led by the instigation of the Devil.</p>

<p id="id00496">1521 e When to a legal Utlegation, &amp;c.] When they return the
excommunication into the Chancery, there is issued out a writ
against the person.</p>

<p id="id00497">1524 f Distrain on Soul, &amp;c.] Excommunication, which
deprives men from being Members of the visible church, and
formally delivers them up to the Devil.</p>

<h3 id="id00498" style="margin-top: 3em">PART III</h3>

<h4 id="id00499" style="margin-top: 2em">CANTO II.</h4>

<h4 id="id00500" style="margin-top: 2em">THE ARGUMENT.</h4>

<p id="id00501">————————————————————————-<br/>

The Saints engage in fierce Contests<br/>

About their Carnal interests;<br/>

To share their sacrilegious Preys,<br/>

According to their Rates of Grace;<br/>

Their various Frenzies to reform,<br/>

When Cromwel left them in a Storm<br/>

Till, in th' Effigy of Rumps, the Rabble<br/>

Burns all their Grandees of the Cabal.<br/>

————————————————————————-<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00502" style="margin-top: 2em">THE learned write, an &lt;g&gt; insect breeze<br/>

Is but a mungrel prince of bees,<br/>

That falls before a storm on cows,<br/>

And stings the founders of his house;<br/>

From whose corrupted flesh that breed                           5<br/>

Of vermin did at first proceed.<br/>

So e're the storm of war broke out,<br/>

Religion spawn'd a various rout<br/>

Of petulant Capricious sects,<br/>

The maggots of corrupted texts,                                10<br/>

That first run all religion down,<br/>

And after ev'ry swarm its own.<br/>

For as the Persian &lt;h&gt; Magi once<br/>

Upon their mothers got their sons,<br/>

That were incapable t' enjoy                                   15<br/>

That empire any other way;<br/>

So PRESBYTER begot the other<br/>

Upon the good old Cause, his mother,<br/>

Then bore then like the Devil's dam,<br/>

Whose son and husband are the same.                            20<br/>

And yet no nat'ral tie of blood<br/>

Nor int'rest for the common good<br/>

Cou'd, when their profits interfer'd,<br/>

Get quarter for each other's beard.<br/>

For when they thriv'd, they never fadg'd,                      25<br/>

But only by the ears engag'd:<br/>

Like dogs that snarl about a bone,<br/>

And play together when they've none,<br/>

As by their truest characters,<br/>

Their constant actions, plainly appears.                       30<br/>

Rebellion now began, for lack<br/>

Of zeal and plunders to grow slack;<br/>

The Cause and covenant to lessen,<br/>

And Providence to b' out of season:<br/>

For now there was no more to purchase                          35<br/>

O' th' King's Revenue, and the Churches,<br/>

But all divided, shar'd, and gone,<br/>

That us'd to urge the Brethren on;<br/>

Which forc'd the stubborn'st for the Cause,<br/>

To cross the cudgels to the laws,                              40<br/>

That what by breaking them th' had gain'd.<br/>

By their support might be maintain'd;<br/>

Like thieves, that in a hemp-plot lie<br/>

Secur'd against the hue-and-cry;<br/>

For PRESBYTER and INDEPENDANT                                  45<br/>

Were now turn'd plaintiff and defendant;<br/>

Laid out their apostolic functions<br/>

On carnal orders and injunctions;<br/>

And all their precious Gifts and Graces<br/>

On outlawries and scire facias;                                50<br/>

At &lt;i&gt; Michael's term had many a trial,<br/>

Worse than the Dragon and St. Michael,<br/>

Where thousands fell, in shape of fees,<br/>

Into the bottomless abyss.<br/>

For when like brethren, and like friends,                      55<br/>

They came to share their dividends,<br/>

And ev'ry partner to possess<br/>

His Church and State Joint-Purchases,<br/>

In which the ablest Saint, and best,<br/>

Was nam'd in trust by all the rest,                            60<br/>

To pay their money; and, instead<br/>

Of ev'ry Brother, pass the deed;<br/>

He strait converted all his gifts<br/>

To pious frauds and holy shifts;<br/>

And settled all the other shares                               65<br/>

Upon his outward man and's heirs;<br/>

Held all they claim'd as forfeit lands,<br/>

Deliver'd up into his hands,<br/>

And pass'd upon his conscience,<br/>

By Pre-intail of Providence;                                   70<br/>

Impeach'd the rest for reprobates,<br/>

That had no titles to estates,<br/>

But by their spiritual attaints<br/>

Degraded from the right of Saints.<br/>

This b'ing reveal'd, they now begun                            75<br/>

With law and conscience to fall on,<br/>

And laid about as hot and brain-sick<br/>

As th' Utter Barrister of &lt;k&gt; SWANSWICK;<br/>

Engag'd with moneybags as bold<br/>

As men with sand bags did of old;                              80<br/>

That brought the lawyers in more fees<br/>

Than all unsanctify'd Trustees;<br/>

Till he who had no more to show<br/>

I' th' case receiv'd the overthrow;<br/>

Or both sides having had the worst,                            85<br/>

They parted as they met at first.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00503">Poor PRESBYTER was now reduc'd,<br/>

Secluded, and cashier'd, and chous'd<br/>

Turn'd out, and excommunicate<br/>

From all affairs of Church and State;                          90<br/>

Reform'd t' a reformado Saint,<br/>

And glad to turn itinerant,<br/>

To stroll and teach from town to town,<br/>

And those he had taught up, teach down.<br/>

And make those uses serve agen                                 95<br/>

Against the new-enlighten'd men,<br/>

As fit as when at first they were<br/>

Reveal'd against the CAVALIER;<br/>

Damn ANABAPTIST and FANATIC,<br/>

As pat as Popish and Prelatic;                                100<br/>

And with as little variation,<br/>

To serve for any Sect i' th' nation.<br/>

The Good Old Cause, which some believe<br/>

To be the Dev'l that tempted EVE<br/>

With Knowledge, and does still invite                         105<br/>

The world to mischief with new Light,<br/>

Had store of money in her purse<br/>

When he took her for bett'r or worse;<br/>

But now was grown deform'd and poor,<br/>

And fit to be turn'd out of door.                             110<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00504">The INDEPENDENTS (whose first station<br/>

Was in the rear of reformation,<br/>

A mungrel kind of church-dragoons,<br/>

That serv'd for horse and foot at once;<br/>

And in the saddle of one steed                                115<br/>

The Saracen and Christian rid;<br/>

Were free of ev'ry spiritual order,<br/>

To preach, and fight, and pray, and murder)<br/>

No sooner got the start to lurch<br/>

Both disciplines, of War and Church                           120<br/>

And Providence enough to run<br/>

The chief commanders of 'em down,<br/>

But carry'd on the war against<br/>

The common enemy o' th' Saints,<br/>

And in a while prevail'd so far,                              125<br/>

To win of them the game of war,<br/>

And be at liberty once more<br/>

T' attack themselves, as th' had before.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00505">For now there was no foe in arms,<br/>

T' unite their factions with alarms,                          130<br/>

But all reduc'd and overcome,<br/>

Except their worst, themselves at home,<br/>

Wh' had compass'd all they pray'd, and swore,<br/>

And fought, and preach'd, and plunder'd for;<br/>

Subdu'd the Nation, Church, and State,                        135<br/>

And all things, but their laws and hate:<br/>

But when they came to treat and transact,<br/>

And share the spoil of all th' had ransackt,<br/>

To botch up what th' had torn and rent,<br/>

Religion and the Government,                                  140<br/>

They met no sooner, but prepar'd<br/>

To pull down all the war had spar'd<br/>

Agreed in nothing, but t' abolish,<br/>

Subvert, extirpate, and demolish.<br/>

For knaves and fools b'ing near of kin                        145<br/>

As &lt;l&gt; Dutch Boors are t' a Sooterkin,<br/>

Both parties join'd to do their best<br/>

To damn the publick interest,<br/>

And herded only in consults,<br/>

To put by one another's bolts;                                150<br/>

T' out-cant the &lt;m&gt; Babylonian labourers,<br/>

At all their dialects of jabberers,<br/>

And tug at both ends of the saw,<br/>

To tear down Government and Law.<br/>

For as two cheats, that play one game,                        155<br/>

Are both defeated of their aim;<br/>

So those who play a game of state,<br/>

And only cavil in debate,<br/>

Although there's nothing lost or won,<br/>

The publick bus'ness is undone;                               160<br/>

Which still the longer 'tis in doing,<br/>

Becomes the surer way to ruin.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00506">This, when the ROYALISTS perceiv'd,<br/>

(Who to their faith as firmly cleav'd,<br/>

And own'd the right they had paid down                        165<br/>

So dearly for, the Church and Crown,)<br/>

Th' united constanter, and sided<br/>

The more, the more their foes divided.<br/>

For though out-number'd, overthrown<br/>

And by the fate of war run down)                              170<br/>

Their duty never was defeated,<br/>

Nor from their oaths and faith retreated;<br/>

For loyalty is still the same,<br/>

Whether it win or lose the game;<br/>

True as the dial to the sun,                                  175<br/>

Although it be not shin'd upon.<br/>

But when these brethren in evil,<br/>

Their adversaries, and the Devil,<br/>

Began once more to shew them play,<br/>

And hopes, at least, to have a day,                           180<br/>

They rally'd in parades of woods,<br/>

And unfrequented solitudes;<br/>

Conven'd at midnight in out-houses,<br/>

T' appoint new-rising rendezvouzes,<br/>

And with a pertinacy unmatch'd,                               185<br/>

For new recruits of danger watch'd.<br/>

No sooner was one blow diverted,<br/>

But up another party started;<br/>

And, as if nature too, in haste<br/>

To furnish out supplies as fast,                              190<br/>

Before her time, had turn'd destruction<br/>

T' a new and numerous production,<br/>

No sooner those were overcome,<br/>

But up rose others in their room,<br/>

That, like the Christian faith, increast                      195<br/>

The more, the more they were supprest<br/>

Whom neither chains, nor transportation,<br/>

Proscription, sale, or confiscation,<br/>

Nor all the desperate events<br/>

Of former try'd experiments                                   200<br/>

Nor wounds cou'd terrify, nor mangling,<br/>

To leave off loyalty and dangling;<br/>

Nor death (with all his bones) affright<br/>

From vent'ring to maintain the right,<br/>

From staking life and fortune down                            205<br/>

'Gainst all together, for the Crown;<br/>

But kept the title of their cause<br/>

From forfeiture, like claims in laws<br/>

And prov'd no prosp'rous usurpation<br/>

Can ever settle in the nation;                                210<br/>

Until, in spight of force and treason,<br/>

They put their loyalty in possession;<br/>

And by their constancy and faith,<br/>

Destroy 'd the mighty men of Gath.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00507">Toss'd in a furious hurricane,                                215<br/>

Did OLIVER give up his reign;<br/>

And was believ'd, as well by Saints,<br/>

As mortal men and miscreants,<br/>

To founder in the Stygian Ferry;<br/>

Until he was retriev'd by STERRY,                             220<br/>

Who, in a faise erroneous dream,<br/>

Mistook the New Jerusalem<br/>

Prophanely for the apocryphal<br/>

&lt;o&gt; False Heaven at the end o' th' Hall;<br/>

Whither it was decreed by Fate                                225<br/>

His precious reliques to translate.<br/>

So ROMULUS &lt;p&gt; was seen before<br/>

B' as orthodox a Senator;<br/>

From whose divine illumination<br/>

He stole the Pagan revelation.                                230<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00508">Next him his &lt;q&gt; Son and Heir Apparent<br/>

Succeeded, though a lame vicegerent;<br/>

Who first laid by the Parliament,<br/>

The only crutch on which he leant;<br/>

And then sunk underneath the State,                           235<br/>

That rode him above horseman's weight.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00509">And now the Saints began their reign,<br/>

For which th' had yearn'd so long in vain,<br/>

And felt such bowel-hankerings,<br/>

To see an empire all of Kings.                                240<br/>

Deliver'd from the Egyptian awe<br/>

Of Justice, Government, and Law,<br/>

And free t' erect what spiritual Cantons<br/>

Should be reveal'd, or Gospel Hans-Towns,<br/>

To edify upon the ruins                                       245<br/>

Of &lt;r&gt; JOHN of LEYDEN'S old Out-goings;<br/>

Who for a weather-cock hung up,<br/>

Upon the Mother Church's top;<br/>

Was made a type, by Providence,<br/>

Of all their revelations since;                               250<br/>

And now fulfill'd by his successors,<br/>

Who equally mistook their measures<br/>

For when they came to shape the model,<br/>

Not one could fit another's noddle;<br/>

But found their Light and Gifts more wide                     255<br/>

From fadging than th' unsanctify'd;<br/>

While ev'ry individual brother<br/>

Strove hand to fist against another;<br/>

And still the maddest, and most crackt,<br/>

Were found the busiest to transact                            260<br/>

For though most hands dispatch apace,<br/>

And make light work, (the proverb says,)<br/>

Yet many diff'rent intellects<br/>

Are found t' have contrary effects;<br/>

And many heads t' obstruct intrigues,                         265<br/>

As slowest insects have most legs.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00510">Some were for setting up a King;<br/>

But all the rest for no such thing,<br/>

Unless KING JESUS. Others tamper'd<br/>

For FLEETWOOD, DESBOROUGH, and LAMBERT;                       270<br/>

Some for the Rump; and some, more crafty,<br/>

For Agitators, and the safety;<br/>

Some for the Gospel, and massacres<br/>

Of Spiritual Affidavit-makers,<br/>

That swore to any human regence,                              275<br/>

Oaths of supremacy and allegiance;<br/>

Yea, though the ablest swearing Saint<br/>

That vouch'd the Bulls o' th' Covenant:<br/>

Others for pulling down th' high-places<br/>

Of Synods and Provincial Classes,                             280<br/>

That us'd to make such hostile inroads<br/>

Upon the Saints, like bloody NIMRODS<br/>

Some for fulfilling prophecies,<br/>

And th' expiration of th' excise<br/>

And some against th' Egyptian bondage                         285<br/>

Of holy-days, and paying poundage:<br/>

Some for the cutting down of groves,<br/>

And rectifying bakers' loaves:<br/>

And some for finding out expedients<br/>

Against the slav'ry of obedience.                             290<br/>

Some were for Gospel Ministers,<br/>

And some for Red-coat Seculars,<br/>

As men most fit t' hold forth the word,<br/>

And wield the one and th' other sword.<br/>

Some were for carrying on the work                            295<br/>

Against the Pope, and some the Turk;<br/>

Some for engaging to suppress,<br/>

The Camisado of surplices,<br/>

That gifts and dispensations hinder'd,<br/>

And turn'd to th' Outward Man the Inward;                     300<br/>

More proper for the cloudy night<br/>

Of Popery than Gospel Light.<br/>

Others were for abolishing<br/>

That tool of matrimony, a ring,<br/>

With which th' unsanctify'd bridegroom                        305<br/>

Is marry'd only to a thumb;<br/>

(As wise as ringing of a pig,<br/>

That us'd to break up ground, and dig;)<br/>

The bride to nothing but her will,<br/>

That nulls the after-marriage still                           310<br/>

Some were for th' utter extirpation<br/>

Of linsey-woolsey in the nation;<br/>

And some against all idolizing<br/>

The Cross in shops-books, or Baptizing<br/>

Others to make all things recant                              315<br/>

The Christian or Surname of Saint;<br/>

And force all churches, streets, and towns,<br/>

The holy title to renounce.<br/>

Some 'gainst a Third Estate of Souls,<br/>

And bringing down the price of coals:                         320<br/>

Some for abolishing black-pudding,<br/>

And eating nothing with the blood in;<br/>

To abrogate them roots and branches;<br/>

While others were for eating haunches<br/>

Of warriors, and now and then,                                325<br/>

The flesh of Kings and mighty men<br/>

And some for breaking of their bones<br/>

With rods of ir'n, by secret ones:<br/>

For thrashing mountains, and with spells<br/>

For hallowing carriers' packs and bells:                      330<br/>

Things that the legend never heard of,<br/>

But made the wicked sore afear'd of.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00511">The quacks of Government (who sate<br/>

At th' unregarded helm of State,<br/>

And understood this wild confusion                            335<br/>

Of fatal madness and delusion,<br/>

Must, sooner than a prodigy,<br/>

Portend destruction to be nigh)<br/>

Consider'd timely how t' withdraw,<br/>

And save their wind-pipes from the law;                       340<br/>

For one rencounter at the bar<br/>

Was worse than all th' had 'scap'd in war;<br/>

And therefore met in consultation<br/>

To cant and quack upon the nation;<br/>

Not for the sickly patient's sake,                            345<br/>

For what to give, but what to take;<br/>

To feel the pulses of their fees,<br/>

More wise than fumbling arteries:<br/>

Prolong the snuff of life in pain,<br/>

And from the grave recover — Gain.                           350<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00512">'Mong these there was a &lt;s&gt; politician<br/>

With more heads than a beast in vision,<br/>

And more intrigues in ev'ry one<br/>

Than all the whores of Babylon:<br/>

So politic, as if one eye                                     355<br/>

Upon the other were a spy,<br/>

That, to trepan the one to think<br/>

The other blind, both strove to blink;<br/>

And in his dark pragmatick way,<br/>

As busy as a child at play.                                   360<br/>

H' had seen three Governments run down,<br/>

And had a hand in ev'ry one;<br/>

Was for 'em and against 'em all,<br/>

But barb'rous when they came to fall<br/>

For, by trepanning th' old to ruin,                           365<br/>

He made his int'rest with the new one<br/>

Play'd true and faithful, though against<br/>

His conscience, and was still advanc'd.<br/>

For by the witchcraft of rebellion<br/>

Transform'd t' a feeble state-camelion,                       370<br/>

By giving aim from side to side,<br/>

He never fail'd to save his tide,<br/>

But got the start of ev'ry state,<br/>

And at a change ne'er came too late;<br/>

Cou'd turn his word, and oath, and faith,                     375<br/>

As many ways as in a lath;<br/>

By turning, wriggle, like a screw,<br/>

Int' highest trust, and out, for new.<br/>

For when h' had happily incurr'd,<br/>

Instead of hemp, to be preferr'd,                             380<br/>

And pass'd upon a government,<br/>

He pay'd his trick, and out he went<br/>

But, being out, and out of hopes<br/>

To mount his ladder (more) of ropes,<br/>

Wou'd strive to raise himself upon                            385<br/>

The publick ruin, and his own;<br/>

So little did he understand<br/>

The desp'rate feats he took in hand.<br/>

For when h' had got himself a name<br/>

For fraud and tricks, he spoil'd his game;                    390<br/>

Had forc'd his neck into a noose,<br/>

To shew his play at fast and loose;<br/>

And when he chanc'd t' escape, mistook<br/>

For art and subtlety, his luck.<br/>

So right his judgment was cut fit,                            395<br/>

And made a tally to his wit,<br/>

And both together most profound<br/>

At deeds of darkness under-ground;<br/>

As th' earth is easiest undermin'd<br/>

By vermin impotent and blind.                                 400<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00513">By all these arts, and many more,<br/>

H' had practis'd long and much before,<br/>

Our state artificer foresaw<br/>

Which way the world began to draw.<br/>

For as old sinners have all points                            405<br/>

O' th' compass in their bones and joints,<br/>

Can by their pangs and aches find<br/>

All turns and changes of the wind,<br/>

And better than by &lt;t&gt; NAPIER's bones<br/>

Feel in their own the age of moons;                           410<br/>

So guilty sinners in a state<br/>

Can by their crimes prognosticate,<br/>

And in their consciences feel pain<br/>

Some days before a show'r of rain.<br/>

He therefore wisely cast about,                               415<br/>

All ways he cou'd, t' ensure his throat;<br/>

And hither came, t' observe and smoke<br/>

What courses other riskers took<br/>

And to the utmost do his best<br/>

To save himself, and hang the rest.                           420<br/>

To match this Saint, there was &lt;u&gt; another<br/>

As busy and perverse a Brother,<br/>

An haberdasher of small wares<br/>

In politicks and state affairs;<br/>

More Jew than Rabbi ACHITOPHEL,                               425<br/>

And better gifted to rebel:<br/>

For when h' had taught his tribe to 'spouse<br/>

The Cause, aloft, upon one house,<br/>

He scorn'd to set his own in order,<br/>

But try'd another, and went further;                          430<br/>

So suddenly addicted still<br/>

To's only principle, his will,<br/>

That whatsoe'er it chanc'd to prove,<br/>

Nor force of argument cou'd move;<br/>

Nor law, nor cavalcade of Holborn,                            435<br/>

Could render half a grain less stubborn.<br/>

For he at any time would hang<br/>

For th' opportunity t' harangue;<br/>

And rather on a gibbet dangle,<br/>

Than miss his dear delight, to wrangle;                       440<br/>

In which his parts were so accomplisht,<br/>

That, right or wrong, he ne'er was non-plusht;<br/>

But still his tongue ran on, the less<br/>

Of weight it bore, with greater ease;<br/>

And with its everlasting clack                                445<br/>

Set all men's ears upon the rack.<br/>

No sooner cou'd a hint appear,<br/>

But up he started to picqueer,<br/>

And made the stoutest yield to mercy,<br/>

When he engag'd in controversy.                               450<br/>

Not by the force of carnal reason,<br/>

But indefatigable teazing;<br/>

With vollies of eternal babble,<br/>

And clamour, more unanswerable.<br/>

For though his topics, frail and weak,                        455<br/>

Cou'd ne'er amount above a freak,<br/>

He still maintain'd 'em, like his faults,<br/>

Against the desp'ratest assaults;<br/>

And back'd their feeble lack of sense,<br/>

With greater heat and confidence?                             460<br/>

As bones of Hectors, when they differ,<br/>

The more they're cudgel'd grow the stiffer.<br/>

Yet when his profit moderated,<br/>

The fury of his heat abated.<br/>

For nothing but his interest                                  465<br/>

Cou'd lay his Devil of Contest.<br/>

It was his choice, or chance; or curse,<br/>

T' espouse the Cause for bett'r or worse,<br/>

And with his worldly goods and wit,<br/>

And soul and body, worship'd it:                              470<br/>

But when he found the sullen trapes<br/>

Possess'd with th' Devil, worms, and claps;<br/>

The &lt;w&gt; Trojan mare, in foal with Greeks,<br/>

Not half so full of jadish tricks;<br/>

Though squeamish in her outward woman,                        475<br/>

As loose and rampant as Dol Common;<br/>

He still resolv'd to mend the matter,<br/>

T' adhere and cleave the obstinater;<br/>

And still the skittisher and looser<br/>

Her freaks appear'd, to sit the closer.                       480<br/>

For fools are stubborn in their way,<br/>

As coins are harden'd by th' allay:<br/>

And obstinacy's ne'er so stiff<br/>

As when 'tis in a wrong belief.<br/>

These two, with others, being met,                            485<br/>

And close in consultation set,<br/>

After a discontented pause,<br/>

And not without sufficient cause,<br/>

The orator we nam'd of late,<br/>

Less troubled with the pangs of State                         490<br/>

Than with his own impatience,<br/>

To give himself first audience,<br/>

After he had a while look'd wise,<br/>

At last broke silence, and the ice.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00514">Quoth he, There's nothing makes me doubt                      495<br/>

Our last out-goings brought about,<br/>

More than to see the characters<br/>

Of real jealousies and fears<br/>

Not feign'd, as once, but, sadly horrid,<br/>

Scor'd upon ev'ry Member's forehead;                          500<br/>

Who, 'cause the clouds are drawn together,<br/>

And threaten sudden change of weather,<br/>

Feel pangs and aches of state-turns,<br/>

And revolutions in their corns;<br/>

And, since our workings-out are cross'd,                      505<br/>

Throw up the Cause before 'tis lost.<br/>

Was it to run away we meant,<br/>

When, taking of the Covenant,<br/>

The lamest cripples of the brothers<br/>

Took oaths to run before all others;                          510<br/>

But in their own sense only swore<br/>

To strive to run away before;<br/>

And now would prove, that words and oath<br/>

Engage us to renounce them both?<br/>

'Tis true, the Cause is in the lurch,                         515<br/>

Between a Right and Mungrel-Church;<br/>

The Presbyter and Independent,<br/>

That stickle which shall make an end on't;<br/>

As 'twas made out to us the last<br/>

Expedient — ( I mean &lt;x&gt; Marg'ret's Fast,)                   520<br/>

When Providence had been suborn'd,<br/>

What answer was to be return'd.<br/>

Else why should tumults fright us now,<br/>

We have so many times come through?<br/>

And understand as well to tame,                               525<br/>

As when they serve our turns t'inflame:<br/>

Have prov'd how inconsiderable<br/>

Are all engagements of the rabble,<br/>

Whose frenzies must be reconcil'd<br/>

With drums and rattles, like a child;                         530<br/>

But never prov'd so prosperous<br/>

As when they were led on by us<br/>

For all our scourging of religion<br/>

Began with tumult and sedition;<br/>

When hurricanes of fierce commotion                           535<br/>

Became strong motives to devotion;<br/>

(As carnal seamen, in a storm,<br/>

Turn pious converts, and reform;)<br/>

When rusty weapons, with chalk'd edges,<br/>

Maintain'd our feeble privileges;                             540<br/>

And brown-bills levy'd in the City,<br/>

Made bills to pass the Grand Committee;<br/>

When zeal, with aged clubs and gleaves,<br/>

Gave chace to rochets and white sleeves,<br/>

And made the Church, and State, and Laws,                     545<br/>

Submit t' old iron and the Cause.<br/>

And as we thriv'd by tumults then,<br/>

So might we better now agen,<br/>

If we knew how, as then we did,<br/>

To use them rightly in our need:                              550<br/>

Tumults, by which the mutinous<br/>

Betray themselves instead of us.<br/>

The hollow-hearted, disaffected,<br/>

And close malignant are detected,<br/>

Who lay their lives and fortunes down                         555<br/>

For pledges to secure our own;<br/>

And freely sacrifice their ears<br/>

T' appease our jealousies and fears;<br/>

And yet, for all these providences<br/>

W' are offer'd, if we had our senses;                         560<br/>

We idly sit like stupid blockheads,<br/>

Our hands committed to our pockets;<br/>

And nothing but our tongues at large,<br/>

To get the wretches a discharge:<br/>

Like men condemn'd to thunder-bolts,                          565<br/>

Who, ere the blow, become mere dolts;<br/>

Or fools besotted with their crimes,<br/>

That know not how to shift betimes,<br/>

And neither have the hearts to stay,<br/>

Nor wit enough to run away;                                   570<br/>

Who, if we cou'd resolve on either,<br/>

Might stand or fall at least together;<br/>

No mean or trivial solace<br/>

To partners in extreme distress;<br/>

Who us'd to lessen their despairs,                            575<br/>

By parting them int' equal shares;<br/>

As if the more they were to bear,<br/>

They felt the weight the easier;<br/>

And ev'ry one the gentler hung,<br/>

The more he took his turn among.                              580<br/>

But 'tis not come to that, as yet,<br/>

If we had courage left, or wit;<br/>

Who, when our fate can be no worse,<br/>

Are fitted for the bravest course;<br/>

Have time to rally, and prepare                               585<br/>

Our last and best defence, despair;<br/>

Despair, by which the gallant'st feats<br/>

Have been atchiev'd in greatest straits,<br/>

And horrid'st danger safely wav'd,<br/>

By being courageously out-brav'd;                             590<br/>

As wounds by wider wounds are heal'd,<br/>

And poisons by themselves expell'd:<br/>

And so they might be now agen,<br/>

If we were, what we shou'd be, men;<br/>

And not so dully desperate,                                   595<br/>

To side against ourselves with Fate;<br/>

As criminals, condemn'd to suffer,<br/>

Are blinded first, and then turn'd over.<br/>

This comes of breaking Covenants,<br/>

And setting up Exauns of Saints,                              600<br/>

That fine, like aldermen, for grace,<br/>

To be excus'd the efficace.<br/>

For Spiritual men are too transcendent,<br/>

That mount their banks for Independent,<br/>

To hang like &lt;y&gt; MAHOMET in th' air,                          605<br/>

Or St. IGNATIUS at his prayer,<br/>

By pure geometry, and hate<br/>

Dependence upon Church or State;<br/>

Disdain the pedantry o' th' letter;<br/>

And since obedience is better                                 610<br/>

(The Scripture says) than sacrifice,<br/>

Presume the less on't will suffice;<br/>

And scorn to have the moderat'st stints<br/>

Prescrib'd their peremptory hints,<br/>

Or any opinion, true or false,                                615<br/>

Declar'd as such, in doctrinals<br/>

But left at large to make their best on,<br/>

Without b'ing call'd t' account or question,<br/>

Interpret all the spleen reveals;<br/>

As WHITTINGTON explain'd the bells;                           620<br/>

And bid themselves turn back agen<br/>

Lord May'rs of New Jerusalem;<br/>

But look so big and over-grown,<br/>

They scorn their edifiers t' own,<br/>

Who taught them all their sprinkling lessons,                 625<br/>

Their tones, and sanctified expressions<br/>

Bestow'd their Gifts upon a Saint,<br/>

Like Charity on those that want;<br/>

And learn'd th' apocryphal bigots<br/>

T' inspire themselves with short-hand notes;                  630<br/>

For which they scorn and hate them worse<br/>

Than dogs and cats do sow-gelders.<br/>

For who first bred them up to pray,<br/>

And teach, the House of Commons Way?<br/>

Where had they all their gifted phrases,                      635<br/>

But from our CALAMYS and CASES?<br/>

Without whose sprinkling and sowing,<br/>

Who e'er had heard of NYE or OWEN?<br/>

Their dispensations had been stifled,<br/>

But for our ADONIRAM BYFIELD;                                 640<br/>

And had they not begun the war,<br/>

Th' had ne'er been sainted, as they are:<br/>

For Saints in peace degenerate,<br/>

And dwindle down to reprobate;<br/>

Their zeal corrupts, like standing water,                     645<br/>

In th' intervals of war and slaughter;<br/>

Abates the sharpness of its edge,<br/>

Without the power of sacrilege.<br/>

And though they've tricks to cast their sins<br/>

As easy as &lt;z&gt; serpents do their skins,                       650<br/>

That in a while grow out agen,<br/>

In peace they turn mere carnal men,<br/>

And from the most refin'd of saints,<br/>

As naturally grow miscreants,<br/>

As &lt;a&gt; barnacles turn SOLAND geese                            655<br/>

In th' Islands of the ORCADES.<br/>

Their dispensation's but a ticket,<br/>

For their conforming to the wicked;<br/>

With whom the greatest difference<br/>

Lies more in words, and shew, than sense.                     660<br/>

For as the Pope, that keeps the gate<br/>

Of Heaven, wears three crowns of state;<br/>

So he that keeps the gate of Hell,<br/>

Proud &lt;b&gt; CERBERUS, wears three heads as well;<br/>

And if the world has any troth                                665<br/>

Some have been canoniz'd in both.<br/>

But that which does them greatest harm,<br/>

Their spiritual gizzards are too warm,<br/>

Which puts the over-heated sots<br/>

In fevers still, like other goats.                            670<br/>

For though the Whore bends Hereticks<br/>

With flames of fire, like crooked sticks,<br/>

Our Schismaticks so vastly differ,<br/>

Th' hotter th' are, they grow the stiffer;<br/>

Still setting off their spiritual goods                       675<br/>

With fierce and pertinacious feuds.<br/>

For zeal's a dreadful termagant,<br/>

That teaches Saints to tear and rant,<br/>

And Independents to profess<br/>

The doctrine of dependences:                                  680<br/>

Turns meek, and secret, sneaking ones,<br/>

To raw-heads fierce and bloody-bones:<br/>

And, not content with endless quarrels<br/>

Against the wicked, and their morals,<br/>

The &lt;c&gt; GIBELLINES, for want of GUELPHS,                      685<br/>

Divert their rage upon themselves.<br/>

For now the war is not between<br/>

The Brethren and the Men of Sin,<br/>

But Saint and Saint, to spill the blood<br/>

Of one another's brotherhood;                                 690<br/>

Where neither side can lay pretence<br/>

To liberty of conscience,<br/>

Or zealous suff'ring for the cause,<br/>

To gain one groat's-worth of applause;<br/>

For though endur'd with resolution,                           695<br/>

'Twill ne'er amount to persecution.<br/>

Shall precious Saints, and secret ones,<br/>

Break one another's outward bones,<br/>

And eat the flesh of Brethren,<br/>

Instead of Kings and mighty men?                              700<br/>

When fiends agree among themselves,<br/>

Shall they be found the greatest elves?<br/>

When BELL's at union with the DRAGON,<br/>

And BAAL-PEOR friends with DAGON,<br/>

When savage bears agree with bears,                           705<br/>

Shall secret ones lug Saints by th' ears,<br/>

And not atone their fatal wrath,<br/>

When common danger threatens both?<br/>

Shall mastiffs, by the coller pull'd,<br/>

Engag'd with bulls, let go their hold,                        710<br/>

And Saints, whose necks are pawn'd at stake,<br/>

No notice of the danger take?<br/>

But though no pow'r of Heav'n or Hell<br/>

Can pacify phanatick zeal,<br/>

Who wou'd not guess there might be hopes,                     715<br/>

The fear of gallowses and ropes,<br/>

Before their eyes, might reconcile<br/>

Their animosities a while;<br/>

At least until th' had a clear stage,<br/>

And equal freedom to engage,                                  720<br/>

Without the danger of surprize<br/>

By both our common enemies?<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00515">This none but we alone cou'd doubt,<br/>

Who understand their workings out;<br/>

And know them, both in soul and conscience,                   725<br/>

Giv'n up t' as reprobate a nonsense<br/>

As spiritual out-laws, whom the pow'r<br/>

Of miracle can ne'er restore<br/>

We, whom at first they set up under,<br/>

In revelation only of plunder,                                730<br/>

Who since have had so many trials<br/>

Of their encroaching self-denials,<br/>

That rook'd upon us with design<br/>

To out-reform, and undermine;<br/>

Took all our interest and commands                            735<br/>

Perfidiously out of our hands;<br/>

Involv'd us in the guilt of blood<br/>

Without the motive gains allow'd,<br/>

And made us serve as ministerial,<br/>

Like younger Sons of Father BELIAL;                           740<br/>

And yet, for all th' inhuman wrong<br/>

Th' had done us and the Cause so long,<br/>

We never fail to carry on<br/>

The work still as we had begun;<br/>

But true and faithfully obey'd                                745<br/>

And neither preach'd them hurt, nor pray'd;<br/>

Nor troubled them to crop our ears,<br/>

Nor hang us like the cavaliers;<br/>

Nor put them to the charge of gaols,<br/>

To find us pill'ries and cart's-tails,                        750<br/>

Or hangman's wages, which the State<br/>

Was forc'd (before them) to be at,<br/>

That cut, like tallies, to the stumps,<br/>

Our ears for keeping true accompts,<br/>

And burnt our vessels, like a new                             755<br/>

Seal'd peck, or bushel, for b'ing true;<br/>

But hand in hand, like faithful brothers,<br/>

Held for the Cause against all others,<br/>

Disdaining equally to yield<br/>

One syllable of what we held,                                 760<br/>

And though we differ'd now and then<br/>

'Bout outward things, and outward men,<br/>

Our inward men, and constant frame<br/>

Of spirit, still were near the same;<br/>

And till they first began to cant                             765<br/>

And sprinkle down the Covenant,<br/>

We ne'er had call in any place,<br/>

Nor dream'd of teaching down free grace,<br/>

But join'd our gifts perpetually<br/>

Against the common enemy.                                     770<br/>

Although 'twas ours and their opinion,<br/>

Each other's Church was but a RIMMON;<br/>

And yet, for all this gospel-union,<br/>

And outward shew of Church-communion,<br/>

They'll ne'er admit us to our shares                          775<br/>

Of ruling Church or State affairs;<br/>

Nor give us leave t' absolve, or sentence<br/>

T' our own conditions of repentance;<br/>

But shar'd our dividend o' th' Crown,<br/>

We had so painfully preach'd down;                            780<br/>

And forc'd us, though against the grain,<br/>

T' have calls to teach it up again:<br/>

For 'twas but justice to restore<br/>

The wrongs we had receiv'd before;<br/>

And when 'twas held forth in our way,                         785<br/>

W' had been ungrateful not to pay;<br/>

Who, for the right w' have done the nation,<br/>

Have earn'd our temporal salvation;<br/>

And put our vessels in a way<br/>

Once more to come again in play.                              790<br/>

For if the turning of us out<br/>

Has brought this Providence about,<br/>

And that our only suffering<br/>

Is able to bring in the King,<br/>

What would our actions not have done,                         795<br/>

Had we been suffer'd to go on?<br/>

And therefore may pretend t' a share,<br/>

At least; in carrying on th' affair.<br/>

But whether that be so, or not,<br/>

W' have done enough to have it thought;                       800<br/>

And that's as good as if w' had done't,<br/>

And easier pass't upon account:<br/>

For if it be but half deny'd,<br/>

'Tis half as good as justifi'd.<br/>

The world is nat'rally averse                                 805<br/>

To all the truth it sees or hears<br/>

But swallows nonsense, and a lie,<br/>

With greediness and gluttony<br/>

And though it have the pique, and long,<br/>

'Tis still for something in the wrong;                        810<br/>

As women long, when they're with child,<br/>

For things extravagant and wild;<br/>

For meats ridiculous and fulsome,<br/>

But seldom any thing that's wholesome;<br/>

And, like the world, men's jobbernoles                        815<br/>

Turn round upon their ears, the poles;<br/>

And what they're confidently told,<br/>

By no sense else can be control'd.<br/>

And this, perhaps, may prove time means<br/>

Once more to hedge-in Providence,                             820<br/>

For as relapses make diseases<br/>

More desp'rate than their first accesses,<br/>

If we but get again in pow'r,<br/>

Our work is easier than before<br/>

And we more ready and expert                                  825<br/>

I' th' mystery to do our part.<br/>

We, who did rather undertake<br/>

The first war to create than make,<br/>

And when of nothing 'twas begun,<br/>

Rais'd funds as strange to carry 't on;                       830<br/>

Trepann'd the State, and fac'd it down<br/>

With plots and projects of our own;<br/>

And if we did such feats at first,<br/>

What can we now we're better vers'd?<br/>

Who have a freer latitude,                                    835<br/>

Than sinners give themselves, allow'd,<br/>

And therefore likeliest to bring in,<br/>

On fairest terms, our discipline;<br/>

To which it was reveal'd long since,<br/>

We were ordain'd by Providence;                               840<br/>

When &lt;d&gt; three Saints Ears, our predecessors,<br/>

The Cause's primitive Confessors,<br/>

B'ing crucify'd, the nation stood<br/>

In just so many years of blood;<br/>

That, multiply'd by six, exprest                              845<br/>

The perfect number of the beast,<br/>

And prov'd that we must be the men<br/>

To bring this work about agen;<br/>

And those who laid the first foundation,<br/>

Compleat the thorough Reformation:                            850<br/>

For who have gifts to carry on<br/>

So great a work, but we alone?<br/>

What churches have such able pastors,<br/>

And precious, powerful, preaching masters?<br/>

Possess'd with absolute dominions                             855<br/>

O'er brethren's purses and opinions?<br/>

And trusted with the double keys<br/>

Of Heaven and their warehouses;<br/>

Who, when the Cause is in distress,<br/>

Can furnish out what sums they please,                        860<br/>

That brooding lie in bankers' hands,<br/>

To be dispos'd at their commands;<br/>

And daily increase and multiply,<br/>

With doctrine, use, and usury:<br/>

Can fetch in parties (as in war                               865<br/>

All other heads of cattle are)<br/>

From th' enemy of all religions,<br/>

As well as high and low conditions,<br/>

And share them, from blue ribbands, down<br/>

To all blue aprons in the town;                               870<br/>

From ladies hurried in calleches,<br/>

With cor'nets at their footmens' breeches,<br/>

To bawds as fat as Mother Nab;<br/>

All guts and belly, like a crab.<br/>

Our party's great, and better ty'd                            875<br/>

With oaths and trade than any side,<br/>

Has one considerable improvement,<br/>

To double fortify the Cov'nant:<br/>

I mean our Covenant to purchase<br/>

Delinquents titles, and the Churches;                         880<br/>

That pass in sale, from hand to hand,<br/>

Among ourselves, for current land;<br/>

And rise or fall, like Indian actions,<br/>

According to the rate of factions<br/>

Our best reserve for Reformation,                             885<br/>

When new out-goings give occasion;<br/>

That keeps the loins of Brethren girt<br/>

The Covenant (their creed) t' assert;<br/>

And when th' have pack'd a Parliament,<br/>

Will once more try th' expedient:                             890<br/>

Who can already muster friends,<br/>

To serve for members, to our ends,<br/>

That represent no part o' th' nation,<br/>

But &lt;e&gt; Fisher's-Folly Congregation;<br/>

Are only tools to our intrigues,                              895<br/>

And sit like geese to hatch our eggs;<br/>

Who, by their precedents of wit,<br/>

T' out-fast, out-loiter, and out-sit,<br/>

Can order matters underhand,<br/>

To put all bus'ness to a stand;                               900<br/>

Lay publick bills aside for private,<br/>

And make 'em one another drive out;<br/>

Divert the great and necessary,<br/>

With trifles to contest and vary;<br/>

And make the Ration represent,                                905<br/>

And serve for us, in Parliament<br/>

Cut out more work than can be done.<br/>

In &lt;f&gt; PLATO'S year, but finish none;<br/>

Unless it be the Bulls of LENTHAL,<br/>

That always pass'd for fundamental;                           910<br/>

Can set up grandee against grandee,<br/>

To squander time away, and bandy;<br/>

Make Lords and Commoners lay sieges<br/>

To one another's privileges,<br/>

And, rather than compound the quarrel,                        915<br/>

Engage to th' inevitable peril<br/>

Of both their ruins; th' only scope<br/>

And consolation of our hope;<br/>

Who though we do not play the game,<br/>

Assist as much by giving aim:                                 920<br/>

Can introduce our ancient arts,<br/>

For heads of factions t' act their parts;<br/>

Know what a leading voice is worth,<br/>

A seconding, a third, or fourth<br/>

How much a casting voice comes to,                            925<br/>

That turns up trump, of ay, or no;<br/>

And, by adjusting all at th' end,<br/>

Share ev'ry one his dividend<br/>

An art that so much study cost,<br/>

And now's in danger to be lost,                               930<br/>

Unless our ancient virtuosos,<br/>

That found it out, get into th' Houses.<br/>

These are the courses that we took<br/>

To carry things by hook or crook;<br/>

And practis'd down from forty-four,                           935<br/>

Until they turn'd us out of door<br/>

Besides the herds of Boutefeus<br/>

We set on work without the House;<br/>

When ev'ry knight and citizen<br/>

Kept legislative journeymen,                                  940<br/>

To bring them in intelligence<br/>

From all points of the rabble's sense,<br/>

And fill the lobbies of both Houses<br/>

With politick important buzzes:<br/>

Set committees of cabals,                                     945<br/>

To pack designs without the walls;<br/>

Examine, and draw up all news,<br/>

And fit it to our present use.<br/>

Agree upon the plot o' th' farce,<br/>

And ev'ry one his part rehearse,                              950<br/>

Make Q's of answers, to way-lay<br/>

What th' other pasties like to say<br/>

What repartees, and smart reflections,<br/>

Shall be return'd to all objections;<br/>

And who shall break the master-jest,                          955<br/>

And what, and how, upon the rest<br/>

Held pamphlets out, with safe editions,<br/>

Of proper slanders and seditions;<br/>

And treason for a token send,<br/>

By Letter to a Country Friend;                                960<br/>

Disperse lampoons, the only wit<br/>

That men, like burglary, commit;<br/>

Wit falser than a padder's face,<br/>

That all its owner does betrays;<br/>

Who therefore dares not trust it when                         965<br/>

He's in his calling to be seen;<br/>

Disperse the dung on barren earth,<br/>

To bring new weeds of discord forth;<br/>

Be sure to keep up congregations,<br/>

In spight of laws and proclamations:                          970<br/>

For Charlatans can do no good<br/>

Until they're mounted in a crowd;<br/>

And when they're punish'd, all the hurt<br/>

Is but to fare the better for't;<br/>

As long as confessors are sure                                975<br/>

Of double pay for all th' endure;<br/>

And what they earn in persecution,<br/>

Are paid t' a groat in contribution.<br/>

Whence some Tub-Holders-forth have made<br/>

In powd'ring-tubs their richest trade;                        980<br/>

And while they kept their shops in prison,<br/>

Have found their prices strangely risen.<br/>

Disdain to own the least regret<br/>

For all the Christian blood w' have let;<br/>

'Twill save our credit, and maintain                          985<br/>

Our title to do so again;<br/>

That needs not cost one dram of sense,<br/>

But pertinacious impudence.<br/>

Our constancy t' our principles,<br/>

In time will wear out all things else;                        990<br/>

Like marble statues rubb'd in pieces<br/>

With gallantry of pilgrims' kisses;<br/>

While those who turn and wind their oaths,<br/>

Have swell'd and sunk, like other froths;<br/>

Prevail'd a while, but 'twas not long                         995<br/>

Before from world to world they swung:<br/>

As they had turn'd from side to side,<br/>

And as the changelings liv'd, they dy'd.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00516">This said, th' impatient States-monger<br/>

Could now contain himself no longer;                         1000<br/>

Who had not spar'd to shew his piques<br/>

Against th' haranguer's politicks,<br/>

With smart remarks of leering faces,<br/>

And annotations of grimaces.<br/>

After h' had administer'd a dose                             1005<br/>

Of snuff-mundungus to his nose,<br/>

And powder'd th' inside of his skull,<br/>

Instead of th' outward jobbernol,<br/>

He shook it with a scornful look<br/>

On th' adversary, and thus he spoke:                         1010<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00517">In dressing a calves head, although<br/>

The tongue and brains together go,<br/>

Both keep so great a distance here,<br/>

'Tis strange if ever they come near;<br/>

For who did ever play his gambols                            1015<br/>

With such insufferable rambles<br/>

To make the bringing in the KING,<br/>

And keeping of him out, one thing?<br/>

Which none could do, but those that swore<br/>

T' as point-plank nonsense heretofore:                       1020<br/>

That to defend, was to invade;<br/>

And to assassinate, to aid<br/>

Unless, because you drove him out,<br/>

(And that was never made a doubt,)<br/>

No pow'r is able to restore,                                 1025<br/>

And bring him in, but on your score<br/>

A spiritual doctrine, that conduces<br/>

Most properly to all your uses.<br/>

'Tis true, a scorpions oil is said<br/>

To cure the wounds the vermine made;                         1030<br/>

And weapons, drest with salves, restore<br/>

And heal the hurts they gave before;<br/>

But whether Presbyterians have<br/>

So much good nature as the salve,<br/>

Or virtue in them as the vermine,                            1035<br/>

Those who have try'd them can determine.<br/>

Indeed, 'th pity you should miss<br/>

Th' arrears of all your services,<br/>

And for th' eternal obligation<br/>

Y' have laid upon th' ungrateful nation,                     1040<br/>

Be us'd so unconscionably hard,<br/>

As not to find a just reward,<br/>

For letting rapine loose, and murther,<br/>

To rage just so far, but no further;<br/>

And setting all the land on fire,                            1045<br/>

To burn't to a scantling, but no higher;<br/>

For vent'ring to assassinate,<br/>

And cut the throats, of Church and State,<br/>

And not be allow'd the fittest men<br/>

To take the charge of both agen:                             1050<br/>

Especially, that have the grace<br/>

Of self-denying, gifted face;<br/>

Who when your projects have miscarry'd,<br/>

Can lay them, with undaunted forehead,<br/>

On those you painfully trepann'd,                            1055<br/>

And sprinkled in at second hand;<br/>

As we have been, to share the guilt<br/>

Of Christian Blood, devoutly spilt;<br/>

For so our ignorance was flamm'd<br/>

To damn ourselves, t' avoid being damn'd;                    1060<br/>

Till finding your old foe, the hangman,<br/>

Was like to lurch you at back-gammon<br/>

And win your necks upon the set,<br/>

As well as ours, who did but bet,<br/>

(For he had drawn your ears before,                          1065<br/>

And nick'd them on the self-same score,)<br/>

We threw the box and dice away,<br/>

Before y' had lost us, at foul play;<br/>

And brought you down to rook, and lie,<br/>

And fancy only, on the by;                                   1070<br/>

Redeem'd your forfeit jobbernoles<br/>

From perching upon lofty poles;<br/>

And rescu'd all your outward traitors<br/>

From hanging up like aligators;<br/>

For which ingeniously y' have shew'd                         1075<br/>

Your Presbyterian gratitude:<br/>

Would freely have paid us home in kind,<br/>

And not have been one rope behind.<br/>

Those were your motives to divide,<br/>

And scruple, on the other side.                              1080<br/>

To turn your zealous frauds, and force,<br/>

To fits of conscience and remorse;<br/>

To be convinc'd they were in vain,<br/>

And face about for new again;<br/>

For truth no more unveil'd your eyes,                        1085<br/>

Than maggots are convinc'd to flies<br/>

And therefore all your lights and calls<br/>

Are but apocryphal and false,<br/>

To charge us with the consequences<br/>

Of all your native insolences,                               1090<br/>

That to your own imperious wills<br/>

Laid Law and Gospel neck and heels;<br/>

Corrupted the Old Testament,<br/>

To serve the New for precedent<br/>

T' amend its errors, and defects,                            1095<br/>

With murther, and rebellion texts;<br/>

Of which there is not any one<br/>

In all the Book to sow upon<br/>

And therefore (from your tribe) the Jews<br/>

Held Christian doctrine forth, and use;                      1100<br/>

As Mahomet (your chief) began<br/>

To mix them in the Alchoran:<br/>

Denounc'd and pray'd, with fierce devotion,<br/>

And bended elbows on the cushion;<br/>

Stole from the beggars all your tones,                       1105<br/>

And gifted mortifying groans;<br/>

Had Lights where better eyes were blind,<br/>

As pigs are said to see the wind<br/>

Fill'd Bedlam with predestination,<br/>

And Knights-bridge with illumination:                        1110<br/>

Made children, with your tones, to run for't,<br/>

As bad as bloody-bones, or LUNSFORD:<br/>

While women, great with child, miscarry'd,<br/>

For being to malignants marry'd<br/>

Transform'd all wives to DALILAHS                            1115<br/>

Whose husbands were not for the Cause;<br/>

And turn'd the men to ten horn'd cattle,<br/>

Because they came not out to battle<br/>

Made taylors' prentices turn heroes,<br/>

For fear of being transform'd to MEROZ:                      1120<br/>

And rather forfeit their indentures,<br/>

Than not espouse the Saints' adventures.<br/>

Could transubstantiate, metamorphose,<br/>

And charm whole herds of beasts, like Orpheus;<br/>

Inchant the King's and Churches lands                        1125<br/>

T' obey and follow your commands;<br/>

And settle on a new freehold,<br/>

As MARCLY-HILL had done of old:<br/>

Could turn the Covenant, and translate<br/>

The gospel into spoons and plate:                            1130<br/>

Expound upon all merchants' cashes,<br/>

And open th' intricatest places<br/>

Could catechize a money-box,<br/>

And prove all powches orthodox;<br/>

Until the Cause became a DAMON,                              1135<br/>

And PYTHIAS the wicked Mammon.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00518">And yet, in spight of all your charms<br/>

To conjure legion up in arms,<br/>

And raise more devils in the rout<br/>

Than e'er y' were able to cast out,                          1140<br/>

Y' have been reduc'd, and by those fools<br/>

Bred up (you say) in your own schools;<br/>

Who, though but gifted at your feet,<br/>

Have made it plain, they have more wit;<br/>

By whom y' have been so oft trepann'd,                       1145<br/>

And held forth out of all command,<br/>

Out-gifted, out-impuls'd, out-done,<br/>

And out-reveal'd at carryings-on;<br/>

Of all your dispensations worm'd,<br/>

Out-Providenc'd, and out-reform'd;                           1150<br/>

Ejected out of Church and State,<br/>

And all things, but the peoples' hate;<br/>

And spirited out of th' enjoyments<br/>

Of precious, edifying employments,<br/>

By those who lodg'd their Gifts and Graces,                  1155<br/>

Like better bowlers, in your places;<br/>

All which you bore with resolution,<br/>

Charg'd on th' accompt of persecution;<br/>

And though most righteously opprest,<br/>

Against your wills, still acquiesc'd;                        1160<br/>

And never hum'd and hah'd sedition,<br/>

Nor snuffled treason, nor misprision.<br/>

That is, because you never durst;<br/>

For had you preach'd and pray'd your worst,<br/>

Alas! you were no longer able                                1165<br/>

To raise your posse of the rabble:<br/>

One single red-coat centinel<br/>

Out-charm'd the magick of the spell;<br/>

And, with his squirt-fire, could disperse<br/>

Whole troops with chapter rais'd and verse.                  1170<br/>

We knew too well those tricks of yours,<br/>

To leave it ever in your powers;<br/>

Or trust our safeties, or undoings,<br/>

To your disposing of out-goings;<br/>

Or to your ordering Providence,                              1175<br/>

One farthing's-worth of consequence.<br/>

For had you pow'r to undermine,<br/>

Or wit to carry a design,<br/>

Or correspondence to trepan,<br/>

Inveigle, or betray one man,                                 1180<br/>

There's nothing else that intervenes,<br/>

And bars your zeal to use the means<br/>

And therefore wond'rous like, no doubt,<br/>

To bring in Kings, or keep them out.<br/>

Brave undertakers to restore,                                1185<br/>

That cou'd not keep yourselves in pow'r;<br/>

T' advance the int'rests of the Crown,<br/>

That wanted wit to keep your own.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00519">'Tis true, you have (for I'd be loth<br/>

To wrong ye) done your parts in both,                        1190<br/>

To keep him out, and bring him in,<br/>

As grace is introduc'd by sin;<br/>

For 'twas your zealous want of sense,<br/>

And sanctify'd impertinence,<br/>

Your carrying business in a huddle,                          1195<br/>

That forc'd our rulers to new-model;<br/>

Oblig'd the State to tack about,<br/>

And turn you, root and branch, all out;<br/>

To reformado, one and all,<br/>

T' your great &lt;g&gt; Croysado General.                          1200<br/>

Your greedy slav'ring to devour,<br/>

Before 'twas in your clutches, pow'r,<br/>

That sprung the game you were to set,<br/>

Before y' had time to draw the net;<br/>

Your spight to see the Churches' lands                       1205<br/>

Divided into other hands,<br/>

And all your sacrilegious ventures<br/>

Laid out in tickets and debentures;<br/>

Your envy to he sprinkled down,<br/>

By Under-Churches in the town;                               1210<br/>

And no course us'd to stop their mouths,<br/>

Nor th' Independents' spreading growths<br/>

All which consider'd, 'tis most true<br/>

None bring him in so much as you<br/>

Who have prevail'd beyond their plots,                       1215<br/>

Their midnight juntos, and seal'd knots<br/>

That thrive more by your zealous piques,<br/>

Than all their own rash politicks<br/>

And you this way may claim a share<br/>

In carrying (as you brag) th' affair;                        1220<br/>

Else frogs and toads, that croak'd the Jews<br/>

From PHARAOH and his brick-kilns loose,<br/>

And flies and mange, that set them free<br/>

From task-masters and slavery,<br/>

Were likelier to do the feat,                                1225<br/>

In any indiff'rent man's conceit<br/>

For who e'er heard of restoration<br/>

Until your thorough Reformation?<br/>

That is, the King's and Churches' land<br/>

Were sequester'd int' other hands:                           1230<br/>

For only then, and not before,<br/>

Your eyes were open'd to restore.<br/>

And when the work was carrying on,<br/>

Who cross'd it, but yourselves alone?<br/>

As by a world of hints appears,                              1235<br/>

All plain and extant as your ears.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00520">But first, o' th' first: The Isle of WIGHT<br/>

Will rise up, if you should deny't;<br/>

Where HENDERSON, and th' other masses,<br/>

Were sent to cap texts, and put cases;                       1240<br/>

To pass for deep and learned scholars,<br/>

Although but paltry &lt;h&gt; Ob and Sollers:<br/>

As if th' unseasonable fools<br/>

Had been a coursing in the schools;<br/>

Until th' had prov'd the Devil author                        1245<br/>

O' th' Covenant, and the Cause his daughter,<br/>

For when they charg'd him with the guilt<br/>

Of all the blood that had been spilt,<br/>

They did not mean he wrought th' effusion,<br/>

In person, like &lt;i&gt; Sir PRIDE, or HUGHSON,                   1250<br/>

But only those who first begun<br/>

The quarrel were by him set on;<br/>

And who could those be but the Saints,<br/>

Those Reformation Termagants?<br/>

But e'er this pass'd, the wise debate                        1255<br/>

Spent so much time, it grew too late;<br/>

For OLIVER had gotten ground,<br/>

T' inclose him with his warriors round<br/>

Had brought his Providence about,<br/>

And turn'd th' untimely sophists out,                        1260<br/>

Nor had the UXBRIDGE bus'ness less<br/>

Of nonsense in't, or sottishness,<br/>

When from a scoundrel Holder-forth,<br/>

The scum as well as son o' th' earth,<br/>

Your mighty Senators took law;                               1265<br/>

At his command, were forc'd t' withdraw,<br/>

And sacrifice the peace o' th' nation<br/>

To doctrine, use and application.<br/>

So when the SCOTS, your constant cronies,<br/>

Th' espousers of your Cause and monies,                      1270<br/>

Who had so often, in your aid,<br/>

So many ways been soundly paid,<br/>

Came in at last for better ends,<br/>

To prove themselves your trusty friends,<br/>

You basely left them, and the Church                         1275<br/>

They train'd you up to, in the lurch,<br/>

And suffer'd your own tribe of Christians<br/>

To fall before, as true Philistines.<br/>

This shews what utensils y' have been,<br/>

To bring the King's concernments in;                         1280<br/>

Which is so far from being true,<br/>

That none but he can bring in you:<br/>

And if he take you into trust,<br/>

Will find you most exactly just:<br/>

Such as will punctually repay                                1285<br/>

With double interest, and betray.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00521">Not that I think those pantomimes,<br/>

Who vary action with the times,<br/>

Are less ingenious in their art,<br/>

Than those who dully act one part;                           1290<br/>

Or those who turn from side to side,<br/>

More guilty than the wind and tide.<br/>

All countries are a wise man's home,<br/>

And so are governments to some,<br/>

Who change them for the same intrigues                       1295<br/>

That statesmen use in breaking leagues;<br/>

While others, in old faiths and troths,<br/>

Look odd as out-of-fashion'd cloths;<br/>

And nastier in an old opinion,<br/>

Than those who never shift their linnen.                     1300<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00522">For true and faithful's sure to lose,<br/>

Which way soever the game goes;<br/>

And whether parties lose or win,<br/>

Is always nick'd, or else hedg'd in:<br/>

While pow'r usurp'd, like stol'n delight,                    1305<br/>

Is more bewitching than the right;<br/>

And when the times begin to alter,<br/>

None rise so high as from the halter.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00523">And so may we, if w' have but sense<br/>

To use the necessary means;                                  1310<br/>

And not your usual stratagems<br/>

On one another, Lights and Dreams<br/>

To stand on terms as positive,<br/>

As if we did not take, but give:<br/>

Set up the Covenant on crutches,                             1315<br/>

'Gainst those who have us in their clutches,<br/>

And dream of pulling churches down,<br/>

Before w' are sure to prop our own:<br/>

Your constant method of proceeding,<br/>

Without the carnal mans of heeding;                          1320<br/>

Who 'twixt your inward sense and outward,<br/>

Are worse, than if y' had none, accoutred.<br/>

I grant, all courses are in vain,<br/>

Unless we can get in again;<br/>

The only way that's left us now;                             1325<br/>

But all the difficulty's, How?<br/>

'Tis true, w' have money, th' only pow 'r<br/>

That all mankind falls down before;<br/>

Money, that, like the swords of kings,<br/>

Is the last reason of all things;                            1330<br/>

And therefore need not doubt our play<br/>

Has all advantages that way;<br/>

As long as men have faith to sell,<br/>

And meet with those that can pay well;<br/>

Whose half-starv'd pride, and avarice,                       1335<br/>

One Church and State will not suffice<br/>

T' expose to sale, beside the wages<br/>

Of storing plagues to after-ages.<br/>

Nor is our money less our own,<br/>

Than 'twas before we laid it down;                           1340<br/>

For 'twill return, and turn t' account,<br/>

If we are brought, in play upon't:<br/>

Or but, by casting knaves, get in,<br/>

What pow 'r can hinder us to win?<br/>

We know the arts we us'd before,                             1345<br/>

In peace and war, and something more;<br/>

And by th' unfortunate events,<br/>

Can mend our next experiments:<br/>

For when w' are taken into trust,<br/>

How easy are the wisest choust?                              1350<br/>

Who see but th' outsides of our feats,<br/>

And not their secret springs and weights;<br/>

And while they're busy at their ease,<br/>

Can carry what designs we please.<br/>

How easy is it to serve for agents,                          1355<br/>

To prosecute our old engagements?<br/>

To keep the Good Old Cause on foot,<br/>

And present power from taking root?<br/>

Inflame them both with false alarms<br/>

Of plots and parties taking arms;                            1360<br/>

To keep the Nation's wounds too wide<br/>

From healing up of side to side;<br/>

Profess the passionat'st concerns<br/>

For both their interests by turns;<br/>

The only way to improve our own,                             1365<br/>

By dealing faithfully with none;<br/>

(As bowls run true, by being made<br/>

On purpose false, and to be sway'd:)<br/>

For if we should be true to either,<br/>

'Twould turn us out of both together;                        1370<br/>

And therefore have no other means<br/>

To stand upon our own defence,<br/>

But keeping up our ancient party<br/>

In vigour, confident and hearty:<br/>

To reconcile our late dissenters,                            1375<br/>

Our brethren, though by other venters;<br/>

Unite them, and their different maggots,<br/>

As long and short sticks are in faggots,<br/>

And make them join again as close<br/>

As when they first began t' espouse;                         1380<br/>

Erect them into separate<br/>

New Jewish tribes, in Church and State;<br/>

To join in marriage and commerce,<br/>

And only among themselves converse;<br/>

And all that are not of their mind,                          1385<br/>

Make enemies to all mankind:<br/>

Take all religions in and stickle<br/>

From Conclave down to Conventicle;<br/>

Agreeing still, or disagreeing,<br/>

According to the Light in being.                             1390<br/>

Sometimes for liberty of conscience,<br/>

And spiritual mis-rule, in one sense;<br/>

But in another quite contrary,<br/>

As dispensations chance to vary;<br/>

And stand for, as the times will bear it,                    1395<br/>

All contradictions of the Spirit:<br/>

Protect their emissaries, empower'd<br/>

To preach sedition and the word;<br/>

And when they're hamper'd by the laws,<br/>

Release the lab'rers for the Cause,                          1400<br/>

And turn the persecution back<br/>

On those that made the first attack;<br/>

To keep them equally in awe,<br/>

From breaking or maintaining law:<br/>

And when they have their fits too soon,                      1405<br/>

Before the full-tides of the moon,<br/>

Put off their zeal t' a fitter season<br/>

For sowing faction in and treason;<br/>

And keep them hooded, and their Churches,<br/>

Like hawks from baiting on their perches,                    1410<br/>

That, when the blessed time shall come<br/>

Of quitting BABYLON and ROME,<br/>

They may be ready to restore<br/>

Their own Fifth Monarchy once more.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00524">Meanwhile be better arm'd to fence                           1415<br/>

Against revolts of Providence.<br/>

By watching narrowly, and snapping<br/>

All blind sides of it, they happen<br/>

For if success could make us Saints,<br/>

Or ruin turn'd us miscreants:                                1420<br/>

A scandal that wou'd fall too hard<br/>

Upon a few, and. unprepar'd.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00525">These are the courses we must run,<br/>

Spight of our hearts, or be undone;<br/>

And not to stand on terms and freaks,                        1425<br/>

Before we have secur'd our necks;<br/>

But do our work, as out of sight,<br/>

As stars by day, and suns by night;<br/>

All licence of the people own,<br/>

In opposition to the Crown;                                  1430<br/>

And for the Crown as fiercely side,<br/>

The head and body to divide;<br/>

The end of all we first design'd,<br/>

And all that yet remains behind<br/>

Be sure to spare no publick rapine,                          1435<br/>

On all emergencies, that happen;<br/>

For 'tis as easy to supplant<br/>

Authority as men in want;<br/>

As some of us, in trusts, have made<br/>

The one hand with the other trade;                           1440<br/>

Gain'd vastly by their joint endeavour;<br/>

The right a thief; the left receiver;<br/>

And what the one, by tricks, forestall'd,<br/>

The other, by as sly, retail'd.<br/>

For gain has wonderful effects                               1445<br/>

T' improve the Factory of Sects;<br/>

The rule of faith in all professions.<br/>

And great DIANA of the EPHESIANS;<br/>

Whence turning of Religion's made<br/>

The means to turn and wind a trade:                          1450<br/>

And though some change it for the worse,<br/>

They put themselves into a course;<br/>

And draw in store of customers,<br/>

To thrive the better in commerce:<br/>

For all Religions flock together,                            1455<br/>

Like tame and wild fowl of a feather;<br/>

To nab the itches of their sects,<br/>

As jades do one another's necks.<br/>

Hence 'tis, Hypocrisy as well<br/>

Will serve t' improve a Church as ZEAL:                      1460<br/>

As Persecution or Promotion,<br/>

Do equally advance Devotion.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00526">Let business, like ill watches, go<br/>

Sometime too fast, sometime too slow;<br/>

For things in order are put out                              1465<br/>

So easy, Ease itself will do't;<br/>

But when the feat's design'd and meant,<br/>

What miracle can bar th' event?<br/>

For 'tis more easy to betray,<br/>

Than ruin any other way.                                     1470<br/>

All possible occasions start<br/>

The weighty'st matters to divert;<br/>

Obstruct, perplex, distract, intangle,<br/>

And lay perpetual trains to wrangle.<br/>

But in affairs of less import,                               1475<br/>

That neither do us good nor hurt,<br/>

And they receive as little by,<br/>

Out-fawn as much, and out-comply;<br/>

And seem as scrupulously just,<br/>

To bait our hooks for greater trust;                         1480<br/>

But still be careful to cry down<br/>

All publick actions, though our own:<br/>

The least miscarriage aggravate,<br/>

And charge it all upon the Sate;<br/>

Express the horrid'st detestation,                           1485<br/>

And pity the distracted nation<br/>

Tell stories scandalous and false,<br/>

I' th' proper language of cabals,<br/>

Where all a subtle statesman says,<br/>

Is half in words, and half in face;                          1490<br/>

(As Spaniards talk in dialogues<br/>

Of heads and shoulders, nods and shrugs:)<br/>

Entrust it under solemn vows<br/>

Of mum, and silence, and the rose,<br/>

To be retail'd again in whispers,                            1495<br/>

For th' easy credulous to disperse.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00527">Thus far the Statesman — When a shout,<br/>

Heard at a distance, put him out;<br/>

And straight another, all aghast,<br/>

Rush'd in with equal fear and haste;                         1500<br/>

Who star'd about, as pale as death,<br/>

And, for a while, as out of breath;<br/>

Till having gather'd up his wits,<br/>

He thus began his tale by fits.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00528">That &lt;k&gt; beastly rabble — that came down                    1505<br/>

From all the garrets — in the town,<br/>

And stalls, and shop-boards — in vast swarms,<br/>

With new-chalk'd bills — and rusty arms,<br/>

To cry the Cause — up, heretofore,<br/>

And bawl the BISHOPS — out of door,                         1510<br/>

Are now drawn up — in greater shoals,<br/>

To roast — and broil us on the coals,<br/>

And all the Grandees — of our Members<br/>

Are carbonading — on the embers;<br/>

Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses —                          1515<br/>

Held forth by Rumps — of Pigs and Geese,<br/>

That serve for Characters — and Badges.<br/>

To represent their Personages:<br/>

Each bonfire is a funeral pile,<br/>

In which they roast, and scorch, and broil,                  1520<br/>

And ev'ry representative<br/>

Have vow'd to roast — and broil alive:<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00529">And 'tis a miracle, we are not<br/>

Already sacrific' d incarnate.<br/>

For while we wrangle here, and jar,                          1525<br/>

W' are grilly'd all at TEMPLE-BAR:<br/>

Some on the sign-post of an ale-house,<br/>

Hang in effigy, on the gallows;<br/>

Made up of rags, to personate<br/>

Respective Officers of State;                                1530<br/>

That henceforth they may stand reputed,<br/>

Proscrib'd in law, and executed;<br/>

And while the Work is carrying on<br/>

Be ready listed under &lt;l&gt; DON,<br/>

That worthy patriot, once the bellows,                       1535<br/>

And tinder-box, of all his fellows;<br/>

The activ'st Member of the Five,<br/>

As well as the most primitive;<br/>

Who, for his faithful service then<br/>

Is chosen for a Fifth agen:                                  1540<br/>

(For since the State has made a Quint<br/>

Of Generals, he's listed in't.)<br/>

This worthy, as the world will say,<br/>

Is paid in specie, his own way;<br/>

For, moulded to the life in clouts,                          1545<br/>

Th' have pick'd from dung-hills hereabouts,<br/>

He's mounted on a hazel bavin,<br/>

A cropp'd malignant baker gave 'm;<br/>

And to the largest bone-fire riding,<br/>

They've roasted &lt;m&gt; COOK already and PRIDE in;               1550<br/>

On whom in equipage and state,<br/>

His scarecrow fellow-members wait,<br/>

And march in order, two and two,<br/>

As at thanksgivings th' us'd to do;<br/>

Each in a tatter'd talisman,                                 1555<br/>

Like vermin in effigie slain.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00530">But (what's more dreadful than the rest)<br/>

Those Rumps are but the tail o' th' Beast,<br/>

Set up by Popish engineers,<br/>

As by the crackers plainly appears;                          1560<br/>

For none but Jesuits have a mission<br/>

To preach the faith with ammunition,<br/>

And propagate the Church with powder:<br/>

Their founder was a blown-up &lt;n&gt; Soldier.<br/>

These spiritual pioneers o' th' Whore's,                     1565<br/>

That have the charge of all her stores,<br/>

Since first they fail'd in their designs,<br/>

To take in Heav'n by springing mines,<br/>

And with unanswerable barrels<br/>

Of gunpowder dispute their quarrels,                         1570<br/>

Now take a course more practicable,<br/>

By laying trains to fire the rabble,<br/>

And blow us up in th' open streets,<br/>

Disguis'd in Rumps, like Sambenites;<br/>

More like to ruin, and confound,                             1575<br/>

Than all the doctrines under ground.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00531">Nor have they chosen Rumps amiss<br/>

For symbols of State-mysteries;<br/>

Though some suppose 'twas but to shew<br/>

How much they scorn'd the Saints, the few;                   1580<br/>

Who, 'cause they're wasted to the stumps,<br/>

Are represented best by Rumps.<br/>

But Jesuits have deeper reaches<br/>

In all their politick far-fetches,<br/>

And from the Coptick Priest, &lt;o&gt; Kircherus,                  1585<br/>

Found out this mystick way to jeer us.<br/>

For, as th' &lt;p&gt; Egyptians us'd by bees<br/>

T' express their antick PTOLOMIES;<br/>

And by their stings, the swords they wore,<br/>

Held forth authority and power;                              1590<br/>

Because these subtil animals<br/>

Bear all their int'rests in their tails;<br/>

And when they're once impar'd in that,<br/>

Are banish'd their well-order'd state;<br/>

They thought all governments were best                       1595<br/>

By Hieroglyphick Rumps exprest.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00532">For, as in bodies natural,<br/>

The rump's the fundament of all;<br/>

So, in a commonwealth, or realm,<br/>

The government is call'd the helm;                           1600<br/>

With which, like vessels under sail,<br/>

They're turn'd and winded by the tail;<br/>

The tail, which birds and fishes steer<br/>

Their courses with through sea and air;<br/>

To whom the rudder of the rump is                            1605<br/>

The same thing with the stern and compass.<br/>

This shews how perfectly the Rump<br/>

And Commonwealth in nature jump.<br/>

For as a fly, that goes to bed,<br/>

Rests with his tail above his head,                          1610<br/>

So in this mungrel state of ours;<br/>

The rabble are the supreme powers;<br/>

That hors'd us on their backs, to show us<br/>

A jadish trick at last, and throw us.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00533">The learned Rabbins of the Jews                              1615<br/>

Write there's a bone, which they call leuz,<br/>

I' th' rump of man, of such a virtue,<br/>

No force in nature can do hurt to;<br/>

And therefore at the last great day,<br/>

All th' other members shall, they say,                       1620<br/>

Spring out of this, as from a seed<br/>

All sorts of vegetals proceed;<br/>

From whence the learned sons of art<br/>

Os Sacrum justly stile that part.<br/>

Then what can better represent                               1625<br/>

Than this Rump Bone the Parliament;<br/>

That, alter several rude ejections,<br/>

And as prodigious resurrections,<br/>

With new reversions of nine lives,<br/>

Starts up, and like a cat revives?                           1630<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00534">But now, alas! they're all expir'd,<br/>

And th' House, as well as Members, fir'd;<br/>

Consum'd in kennels by the rout,<br/>

With which they other fires put out:<br/>

Condemn'd t' ungoverning distress,                           1635<br/>

And paultry, private wretchedness;<br/>

Worse than the Devil, to privation,<br/>

Beyond all hopes of restoration;<br/>

And parted, like the body and soul,<br/>

From all dominion and controul.                              1640<br/>

We, who cou'd lately with a look<br/>

Enact, establish, or revoke;<br/>

Whose arbitrary nods gave law,<br/>

And frowns kept multitudes in awe;<br/>

Before the bluster of whose huff,                            1645<br/>

All hats, as in a storm, flew off;<br/>

Ador'd and bowed to by the great,<br/>

Down to the footman and valet;<br/>

Had more bent knees than chapel-mats,<br/>

And prayers than the crowns of hats;                         1650<br/>

Shall now be scorn'd as wretchedly;<br/>

For ruin's just as low as high;<br/>

Which might be suffer'd, were it all<br/>

The horror that attends our fall:<br/>

For some of us have scores more large                        1655<br/>

Than heads and quarters can discharge;<br/>

And others, who, by restless scraping,<br/>

With publick frauds, and private rapine,<br/>

Have mighty heaps of wealth amass'd,<br/>

Would gladly lay down all at last;                           1660<br/>

And to be but undone, entail<br/>

Their vessels on perpetual jail;<br/>

And bless the Dev'l to let them farms<br/>

Of forfeit souls on no worse terms.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00535">This said, a near and louder shout                           1665<br/>

Put all th' assembly to the rout,<br/>

Who now begun t' out-run their fear,<br/>

As horses do from whom they bear;<br/>

But crowded on with so mach haste,<br/>

Until th' had block'd the passage fast,                      1670<br/>

And barricado'd it with haunches<br/>

Of outward men, and bulks, and paunches,<br/>

That with their shoulders strove to squeeze,<br/>

And rather save a crippled piece<br/>

Of all their crush'd and broken members,                     1675<br/>

Than have them grilled on the embers;<br/>

Still pressing on with heavy packs<br/>

Of one another on their backs:<br/>

The van-guard could no longer hear<br/>

The charges of the forlorn rear,                             1680<br/>

But, born down headlong by the rout,<br/>

Were trampled sorely under foot:<br/>

Yet nothing prov'd so formidable<br/>

As the horrid cookery of the rabble;<br/>

And fear, that keeps all feeling out,                        1685<br/>

As lesser pains are by the gout,<br/>

Reliev'd 'em with a fresh supply<br/>

Of rallied force enough to fly,<br/>

And beat a Tuscan running-horse,<br/>

Whose jockey-rider is all spurs.                             1690<br/>
</p>

<h3 id="id00536" style="margin-top: 3em">NOTES TO PART III. CANTO II.</h3>

<p id="id00537" style="margin-top: 2em">1 g The Learned write, &amp;c.] An insect breeze. Breezes often
bring along with them great quantities of insects, which some
are of opinion, are generated from viscous exhalations in the air;
but our Author makes them proceed from a cow's dung, and
afterwards become a plague to that whence it received its
original.</p>

<p id="id00538">13 h For as the Persian, &amp;c.] The Magi were priests and
philosophers among the Persians, intrusted with the government
both civil and ecclesiastick, much addicted to the observation of
the stars. Zoroaster is reported to be their first author. They had
this custom amongst them, to preserve and continue their
families by incestuous copulation with their own mothers. Some
are of opinion, that the three wise men that came out of the East
to worship our Saviour were some of these.</p>

<p id="id00539">51 i At Michael's Term, &amp;c.] St. Michael, an archangel;
mentioned in St. Jude's Epistle, Verse 9.</p>

<p id="id00540">78 k And laid about, &amp;c.] William Prynne, of Lincoln's-Inn,
Esq. born at Swanswick, who stiled himself Utter Barrister, a
very warm person, and voluminous writer; and after the
Restoration, keeper of the records in the Tower.</p>

<p id="id00541">146 l As Dutch Boors, &amp;c.] It is reported of the Dutch women,
that making so great use of stoves, and often putting them under
their petticoats, they engender a kind of ugly monster, which is
called a Sooterkin.</p>

<p id="id00542">151 m T' out-cant the Babylonian, &amp;c.] At the building of the
Tower of Babel, when God made the confusion of languages.</p>

<p id="id00543">215 Toss'd in a furious Hurricane, &amp;c.] At Oliver's death was a
most furious tempest, such as had not been known in the
memory of man, or hardly ever recorded to have been in this
nation. This Sterry reported something ridiculously fabulous
concerning Oliver, not unlike what Proculus did of Romulus.</p>

<p id="id00544">224 o False Heaven, &amp;c.] After the Restoration, Oliver's body
was dug up, and his head set at the farther end of Westminster-
hall, near which place there is an house of entertainment, which
is commonly known by the name of Heaven.</p>

<p id="id00545">227 p So Romulus, &amp;c.] A Roman Senator, whose name was
Proculus, and much beloved by Romulus, made oath before the
Senate, that this prince appeared to him after his death, and
predicted the future grandeur of that city, promising to be
protector of it; and expressly charged him, that he should be
adored there under the name of Quirinus; and he had his temple
on Mount Quirinale.</p>

<p id="id00546">231 q Next his Son, &amp;c.] Oliver's eldest son Richard was, by
him before his death, declared his successor; and, by order of
privy-council, proclaimed Lord Protector, and received the
compliments of congratulation and condolence, at the same
time, from the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen: and
addresses were presented to him from all parts of the nation,
promising to stand by him with their lives and fortunes. He
summoned a Parliament to meet at Westminster, which
recognized him Lord Protector: yet, notwithstanding,
Fleetwood, Desborough, and their partizans, managed affairs
so, that he was obliged to resign.</p>

<p id="id00547">245 r To edify upon the Ruins, &amp;c.] John of Leyden, whose
name was Buckhold, was a butcher of the same place, but a
crafty, eloquent, and seditious fellow and one of those called
Anabaptists. He went and set up at Munster, where, with
Knipperdoling, and others of the same faction, they spread their
abominable errors, and run about the streets in enthusiastical
raptures, crying, Repent and be baptized, pronouncing dismal
woes against all those that would not embrace their tenets.
About the year 1533 they broke out into an open insurrection,
and seized the palace and magazines, and grew so formidable
that it was very dangerous for those who were not of their
persuasion to dwell in Munster; but at length he and his
associates being subdued and taken, he was executed at
Munster, had his flesh pulled off by two executioners with red-
hot pincers for the space of an hour, and then run through with a
sword.</p>

<p id="id00548">351 s 'Mong these there was a Politician, &amp;c.] This was the
famous E. of S. who was endued with a particular faculty of
undermining and subverting all sorts of government.</p>

<p id="id00549">409 t and better than by Napier's Bones, &amp;c.] The famous Lord
Napier, of Scotland, the first inventor of logarithms, contrived
also a set of square pieces, with numbers on them, made
generally of ivory, (which perform arithmetical and geometrical
calculations,) and are commonly called Napier's Bones.</p>

<p id="id00550">421 u To match this Saint, &amp;c.] The great colonel John
Lilbourn, whose trial is so remarkable, and well known at this
time.</p>

<p id="id00551">475 w The Trojan Mare, &amp;c.] After the Grecians had spent ten
years in the siege of Troy, without the least prospect of success,
they bethought of a stratagem, and made a wooden horse
capable of containing a considerable number of armed men: this
they filled with the choicest of their army, and then pretended to
raise the siege; upon which the credulous Trojans made a
breach in the walls of the city to bring in this fatal plunder; but
when it was brought in, the inclosed heroes soon appeared, and
surprizing the city, the rest entered in at the breach.</p>

<p id="id00552">520 x (I mean Margaret's Fast) &amp;c.] That Parliament used to
have publick fasts kept in St. Margaret's church, Westminster,
as is done to this present time.</p>

<p id="id00553">605 y To hang like Mahomet, &amp;c.] It is reported of Mahomet
the great impostor, that having built a mosque, the roof whereof
was of loadstone, and ordering his corpse, when he was dead, to
be put into an iron coffin, and brought into that place, the
loadstone soon attracted it near the top, where it still hangs in
the air.
No less fabulous is what the legend says of Ignatius Loyola, that
his zeal and devotion transported him so, that at his prayers he
has been seen to be raised from the ground for some
considerable time together.</p>

<p id="id00554">650 z As easy as Serpents, &amp;c.] Naturalists report, that Snakes,
Serpents, &amp;c. cast their skins every year.</p>

<p id="id00555">655 a As Barnacles turn Soland Geese, &amp;c.] It is said that in the
Islands of the Orcades, in Scotland, there are trees which bear
those barnacles, which dropping off into the water, receive life,
and become those birds called soland geese.</p>

<p id="id00556">663 b So he that keeps the Gate of Hell, &amp;c.] The poets feign
the dog Cerberus, that is the porter of hell, to have three heads.</p>

<p id="id00557">685 c The GIBELLINES, &amp;c.] Two great factions in Italy,
distinguished by those names, miserably distracted and wasted
it about the year 1130.</p>

<p id="id00558">841 d When three Saints Ears, &amp;c.] Burton, Prynn, and
Bastwick, three notorious ringleaders of the factious, just at the
beginning of the late horrid rebellion.</p>

<p id="id00559">894 e But Fisher's Folly, &amp;c.] Fisher's Folly, was where
Devonshire-Square now stands, and was a great place of
consultation in those days.</p>

<p id="id00560">907 f Cut out more Work, &amp;c.] Plato's year, or the grand
revolution of the intire machine of the world, was accounted
4000 years.</p>

<p id="id00561">1200 g T' your great Croysado General, &amp;c.] General Fairfax,
who was soon laid aside after he had done some of their
drudgery for them.</p>

<p id="id00562">1241 h To pass for deep and learned Scholars, &amp;c.] Two
ridiculous scribblers, that were often pestering the world with
nonsense.</p>

<p id="id00563">1250 i Like Sir Pride, &amp;c.] The one a brewer, the other a
shoemaker, and both colonels in the rebels' army.</p>

<p id="id00564">1505 k The beastly Rabble that came down, &amp;c.] This is an
accurate description of the mob's burning rumps upon the
admission of the secluded Members, on contempt of the Rump-
Parliament.</p>

<p id="id00565">1534 l Be ready listed under DON] The hangman's name at that
time was Don.</p>

<p id="id00566">1550 m They've roasted COOK already and PRIDE in.] Cook
acted as solicitor-general against King Charles the First at his
trial; and afterwards received his just reward for the same.
Pride, a colonel in the Parliament's army.</p>

<p id="id00567">1564 n Their Founder was a blown up Soldier.] Ignatius Loyola,
the founder of the society of the Jesuits, was a gentleman of
Biscay, in Spain, and bred a soldier; was at Pampelune when it
was besieged by the French in the year 1521, and was so very
lame in both feet, by the damage he sustained there, that he was
forced to keep his bed.</p>

<p id="id00568">1585 o And from their Coptick Priests, Kircherus.] Athanasius
Kircher, a Jesuit, hath wrote largely on the AEgyptian mystical
learning.</p>

<p id="id00569"> 1587 p For, as the AEgyptians us'd by Bees, &amp;c.] The
AEgyptians represented their kings, (many of whose names
were Ptolemy) under the hieroglyphick of a bee, dispensing
honey to the good and virtuous, and having a sting for the
wicked and dissolute.</p>

<h3 id="id00570" style="margin-top: 3em">PART III</h3>

<h4 id="id00571" style="margin-top: 2em">CANTO III</h4>

<h4 id="id00572" style="margin-top: 2em">THE ARGUMENT.</h4>

<p id="id00573">————————————————————————-<br/>

The Knight and squire's prodigious Flight<br/>

To quit th' inchanted Bow'r by Night.<br/>

He plods to turn his amorous Suit<br/>

T' a Plea in Law, and prosecute<br/>

Repairs to Counsel, to advise<br/>

'Bout managing the Enterprise;<br/>

But first resolves to try by Letter,<br/>

And one more fair Address, to get her.<br/>

————————————————————————-<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00574" style="margin-top: 2em">WHO wou'd believe what strange bugbears<br/>

Mankind creates itself of fears<br/>

That spring like fern, that insect weed,<br/>

Equivocally, without seed;<br/>

And have no possible foundation,                                5<br/>

But merely in th' imagination;<br/>

And yet can do more dreadful feats<br/>

Than hags, with all their &lt;q&gt; imps and teats<br/>

Make more bewitch and haunt themselves<br/>

Than all their nurseries of elves?                             10<br/>

For fear does things so like a witch,<br/>

'Tis hard t' unriddle which is which:<br/>

Sets up Communities of senses,<br/>

To chop and change intelligences;<br/>

As &lt;r&gt; Rosicrucian virtuosos                                   15<br/>

Can see with ears, and hear with noses;<br/>

And when they neither see nor hear,<br/>

Have more than both supply'd by fear<br/>

That makes 'em in the dark see visions,<br/>

And hag themselves with apparitions;                           20<br/>

And when their eyes discover least,<br/>

Discern the subtlest objects best<br/>

Do things not contrary, alone,<br/>

To th' course of nature, but its own;<br/>

The courage of the bravest daunt,                              25<br/>

And turn poltroons as valiant:<br/>

For men as resolute appear<br/>

With too much as too little fear<br/>

And when they're out of hopes of flying,<br/>

Will run away from death by dying;                             30<br/>

Or turn again to stand it out,<br/>

And those they fled, like lions, rout.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00575">This HUDIBRAS had prov'd too true,<br/>

Who, by the furies left perdue,<br/>

And haunted with detachments, sent                             35<br/>

From &lt;s&gt; Marshal Legion's regiment,<br/>

Was by a fiend, as counterfeit,<br/>

Reliev'd and rescu'd with a cheat;<br/>

When nothing but himself, and fear,<br/>

Was both the imp and conjurer;                                 40<br/>

As, by the rules o' th' virtuosi,<br/>

It follows in due form of poesie.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00576">Disguis'd in all the masks of night,<br/>

We left our champion on his flight,<br/>

At blind man's buff, to grope his way,                         45<br/>

In equal fear of night and day,<br/>

Who took his dark and desp'rate course,<br/>

He knew no better than his horse;<br/>

And, by an unknown Devil led,<br/>

(He knew as little whither,) fled.                             50<br/>

He never was in greater need,<br/>

Nor less capacity, of speed;<br/>

Disabled, both in man and beast,<br/>

To fly and run away his best;<br/>

To keep the enemy, and fear,                                   55<br/>

From equal falling on his rear.<br/>

And though with kicks and bangs he ply'd<br/>

The further and the nearer side,<br/>

(As seamen ride with all their force,<br/>

And tug as if they row'd the horse,                            60<br/>

And when the hackney sails most swift,<br/>

Believe they lag, or run a-drift,)<br/>

So, though he posted e'er so fast,<br/>

His fear was greater than his haste:<br/>

For fear, though fleeter than the wind,                        65<br/>

Believes 'tis always left behind.<br/>

But when the morn began t' appear,<br/>

And shift t' another scene his fear,<br/>

He found his new officious shade,<br/>

That came so timely to his aid,                                70<br/>

And forc'd him from the foe t' escape,<br/>

Had turn'd itself to RALPHO's shape;<br/>

So like in person, garb, and pitch,<br/>

'Twas hard t' interpret which was which.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00577">For RALPHO had no sooner told                                  75<br/>

The Lady all he had t' unfold,<br/>

But she convey'd him out of sight,<br/>

To entertain the approaching Knight;<br/>

And, while he gave himself diversion,<br/>

T' accommodate his beast and person,                           80<br/>

And put his beard into a posture<br/>

At best advantage to accost her,<br/>

She order'd th' anti-masquerade<br/>

(For his reception) aforesaid:<br/>

But when the ceremony was done,                                85<br/>

The lights put out, and furies gone,<br/>

And HUDIBRAS, among the rest,<br/>

Convey'd away, as RALPHO guess'd,<br/>

The wretched caitiff, all alone,<br/>

(As he believ'd) began to moan,                                90<br/>

And tell his story to himself,<br/>

The Knight mistook him for an elf;<br/>

And did so still till he began<br/>

To scruple at RALPH's Outward Man;<br/>

And thought, because they oft agreed                           95<br/>

T' appear in one another's stead,<br/>

And act the Saint's and Devil's part<br/>

With undistinguishable art,<br/>

They might have done so now, perhaps,<br/>

And put on one another's shapes                               100<br/>

And therefore, to resolve the doubt,<br/>

He star'd upon him, and cry'd out,<br/>

What art? My 'Squire, or that bold Sprite<br/>

That took his place and shape to-night?<br/>

Some busy indepenent pug,                                     105<br/>

Retainer to his Synagogue?<br/>

Alas! quoth he, I'm none of those,<br/>

Your bosom friends, as you suppose;<br/>

But RALPH himself, your trusty 'Squire,<br/>

Wh' has dragg'd your Dunship out o' th' mire,                 110<br/>

And from th' inchantments of a widow,<br/>

Wh' had turn'd you int' a beast, have freed you;<br/>

And, though a prisoner of war,<br/>

Have brought you safe where you now are;<br/>

Which you would gratefully repay                              115<br/>

Your constant Presbyterian way.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00578">That's stranger (quoth the Knight) and stranger.<br/>

Who gave thee notice of my danger?<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00579">Quoth he, Th' infernal Conjurer<br/>

Pursu'd and took me prisoner;                                 120<br/>

And knowing you were hereabout,<br/>

Brought me along to find you out;<br/>

Where I, in hugger-mugger hid,<br/>

Have noted all they said or did:<br/>

And though they lay to him the pageant,                       125<br/>

I did not see him, nor his agent;<br/>

Who play'd their sorceries out of sight,<br/>

T' avoid a fiercer second fight.<br/>

But didst thou see no Devils then?<br/>

Not one (quoth he) but carnal men,                            130<br/>

A little worse than fiends in hell,<br/>

And that She-Devil Jezebel,<br/>

That laugh'd and tee-he'd with derision,<br/>

To see them take your deposition.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00580">What then (quoth HUDIBRAS) was he                             135<br/>

That play'd the Dev'l to examine me?<br/>

A rallying weaver in the town,<br/>

That did it in a parson's gown;<br/>

Whom all the parish take for gifted;<br/>

But, for my part, I ne'er believ'd it:                        140<br/>

In which you told them all your feats,<br/>

Your conscientious frauds and cheats;<br/>

Deny'd your whipping, and confest<br/>

The naked truth of all the rest,<br/>

More plainly than the &lt;t&gt; Rev'rend Writer,                    145<br/>

That to our Churches veil'd his Mitre;<br/>

All which they took in black and white,<br/>

And cudgell'd me to under-write.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00581">What made thee, when they all were gone,<br/>

And none but thou and I alone,                                150<br/>

To act the Devil, and forbear<br/>

To rid me of my hellish fear?<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00582">Quoth he, I knew your constant rate<br/>

And frame of sp'rit too obstinate<br/>

To be by me prevail'd upon                                    155<br/>

With any motives of my own;<br/>

And therefore strove to counterfeit<br/>

The Dev'l a-while, to nick your wit;<br/>

The Devil, that is your constant crony,<br/>

That only can prevail upon ye;                                160<br/>

Else we might still have been disputing,<br/>

And they with weighty drubs confuting.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00583">The Knight who now began to find<br/>

Th' had left the enemy behind,<br/>

And saw no farther harm remain,                               165<br/>

But feeble weariness and pain;<br/>

Perceiv'd, by losing of their way,<br/>

Th' had gain'd th' advantage of the day;<br/>

And, by declining of the road,<br/>

They had, by chance, their rear made good;                    170<br/>

He ventur'd to dismiss his fear,<br/>

That parting's wont to rent and tear,<br/>

And give the desperat'st attack<br/>

To danger still behind its back.<br/>

For having paus'd to recollect,                               175<br/>

And on his past success reflect,<br/>

T' examine and consider why,<br/>

And whence, and how, they came to fly,<br/>

And when no Devil had appear'd,<br/>

What else, it cou'd be said, he fear'd;                       180<br/>

It put him in so fierce a rage,<br/>

He once resolv'd to re-engage;<br/>

Toss'd like a foot-ball back again,<br/>

With shame and vengeance, and disdain.<br/>

Quoth he, it was thy cowardice                                185<br/>

That made me from this leaguer rise<br/>

And when I'd half reduc'd the place,<br/>

To quit it infamously base<br/>

Was better cover'd by the new<br/>

Arriv'd detachment then I knew;                               190<br/>

To slight my new acquests, and run<br/>

Victoriously from battles won;<br/>

And reck'ning all I gain'd or lost,<br/>

To sell them cheaper than they cost;<br/>

To make me put myself to flight,                              195<br/>

And conqu'ring run away by night<br/>

To drag me out, which th' haughty foe<br/>

Durst never have presum'd to do<br/>

To mount me in the dark, by force,<br/>

Upon the bare ridge of my horse;                              200<br/>

Expos'd in querpo to their rage,<br/>

Without my arms and equipage;<br/>

Lest, if they ventur'd to pursue,<br/>

I might th' unequal fight renew;<br/>

And, to preserve thy Outward Man,                             205<br/>

Assum'd my place, and led the van.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00584">All this quoth RALPH, I did, 'tis true,<br/>

Not to preserve my self, but you;<br/>

You, who were damn'd to baser drubs<br/>

Than wretches feel in powd'ring tubs.                         210<br/>

To mount two-wheel'd carroches, worse<br/>

Than managing a wooden-horse<br/>

Dragg'd out through straiter holes by th' ears,<br/>

Eras'd or coup'd for perjurers;<br/>

Who, though th' attempt had prov'd in vain,                   215<br/>

Had had no reason to complain:<br/>

But since it prosper'd, 'tis unhandsome<br/>

To blame the hand that paid our ransome,<br/>

And rescu'd your obnoxious bones<br/>

From unavoidable battoons.                                    220<br/>

The enemy was reinforc'd,<br/>

And we disabled, and unhors'd,<br/>

Disarm'd, unqualify'd for fight,<br/>

And no way left but hasty flight,<br/>

Which though as desp'rate in th' attempt,                     225<br/>

Has giv'n you freedom to condemn't.<br/>

But were our bones in fit condition<br/>

To reinforce the expedition,<br/>

'Tis now unseasonable, and vain,<br/>

To think of falling on again.                                 230<br/>

No martial project to surprize<br/>

Can ever be attempted twice;<br/>

Nor cast design serve afterwards,<br/>

As gamesters tear their losing-cards,<br/>

Beside, our bangs of man and beast                            235<br/>

Are fit for nothing now but rest;<br/>

And for a-while will not be able<br/>

To rally, and prove serviceable;<br/>

And therefore I, with reason, chose<br/>

This stratagem t' amuse our foes;                             240<br/>

To make an honourable retreat,<br/>

And wave a total sure defeat;<br/>

For those that fly may fight again,<br/>

Which he can never do that's slain.<br/>

Hence timely running's no mean part                           245<br/>

Of conduct in the martial art;<br/>

By which some glorious feats atchieve,<br/>

As citizens by breaking thrive;<br/>

And cannons conquer armies, while<br/>

They seem to draw off and recoil;                             250<br/>

Is held the gallantest course, and bravest<br/>

To great exploits, as well as safest;<br/>

That spares th' expence of time and pains,<br/>

And dangerous beating out of brains;<br/>

And in the end prevails as certain                            255<br/>

As those that never trust to fortune;<br/>

But make their fear do execution<br/>

Beyond the stoutest resolution;<br/>

As earthquakes kill without a blow,<br/>

And, only trembling, overthrow,                               260<br/>

If &lt;u&gt; th' ancients crown'd their bravest men<br/>

That only sav'd a citizen,<br/>

What victory could e'er be won,<br/>

If ev'ry one would save but one<br/>

Or fight endanger'd to be lost,                               265<br/>

Where all resolve to save the most?<br/>

By this means, when a battle's won,<br/>

The war's as far from being done;<br/>

For those that save themselves, and fly,<br/>

Go halves, at least, i' th' victory;                          270<br/>

And sometimes, when the loss is small,<br/>

And danger great, they challenge all;<br/>

Print new additions to their feats,<br/>

And emendations in Gazettes;<br/>

And when, for furious haste to run,                           275<br/>

They durst not stay to fire a gun,<br/>

Have done't with bonfires, and at home<br/>

Made squibs and crackers overcome;<br/>

To set the rabble on a flame,<br/>

And keep their governors from blame;                          280<br/>

Disperse the news the pulpit tells,<br/>

Confirm'd with fire-works and with bells;<br/>

And though reduc'd to that extream,<br/>

They have been forc'd to sing Te Deum;<br/>

Yet, with religious blasphemy,                                285<br/>

By flattering Heaven with a lie<br/>

And for their beating giving thanks,<br/>

Th' have rais'd recruits, and fill'd their banks;<br/>

For those who run from th' enemy,<br/>

Engage them equally to fly;                                   290<br/>

And when the fight becomes a chace,<br/>

Those win the day that win the race<br/>

And that which would not pass in fights,<br/>

Has done the feat with easy flights;<br/>

Recover'd many a desp'rate campaign                           295<br/>

With Bordeaux, Burgundy, and Champaign;<br/>

Restor'd the fainting high and mighty<br/>

With brandy-wine and aqua-vitae;<br/>

And made 'em stoutly overcome<br/>

With bachrach, hoccamore, and mum;                            300<br/>

Whom the uncontroul'd decrees of fate<br/>

To victory necessitate;<br/>

With which, although they run or burn<br/>

They unavoidably return:<br/>

Or else their &lt;w&gt; sultan populaces                            305<br/>

Still strangle all their routed Bassas.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00585">Quoth HUDIBRAS, I understand<br/>

What fights thou mean'st at sea and land,<br/>

And who those were that run away,<br/>

And yet gave out th' had won the day;                         310<br/>

Although the rabble sous'd them for't,<br/>

O'er head and ears in mud and dirt.<br/>

'Tis true, our modern way of war<br/>

Is grown more politick by far,<br/>

But not so resolute, and bold,                                315<br/>

Nor ty'd to honour, as the old.<br/>

For now they laugh at giving battle,<br/>

Unless it be to herds of cattle;<br/>

Or fighting convoys of provision,<br/>

The whole design o' the expedition:                           320<br/>

And not with downright blows to rout<br/>

The enemy, but eat them out:<br/>

As fighting, in all beasts of prey,<br/>

And eating, are perform'd one way,<br/>

To give defiance to their teeth                               325<br/>

And fight their stubborn guts to death;<br/>

And those atchieve the high'st renown,<br/>

That bring the others' stomachs down,<br/>

There's now no fear of wounds, nor maiming;<br/>

All dangers are reduc'd to famine;                            330<br/>

And feats of arms, to plot, design,<br/>

Surprize, and stratagem, and mine;<br/>

But have no need nor use of courage,<br/>

Unless it be for glory or forage:<br/>

For if they fight, 'tis but by chance,                        335<br/>

When one side vent'ring to advance,<br/>

And come uncivilly too near,<br/>

Are charg'd unmercifully i' th' rear;<br/>

And forc'd with terrible resistance,<br/>

To keep hereafter at a distance;                              340<br/>

To pick out ground to incamp upon,<br/>

Where store of largest rivers run,<br/>

That serve, instead of peaceful barriers,<br/>

To part th' engagements of their warriors;<br/>

Where both from side to side may skip,                        345<br/>

And only encounter at bo-peep:<br/>

For men are found the stouter-hearted,<br/>

The certainer th' are to be parted,<br/>

And therefore post themselves in bogs,<br/>

As th' ancient &lt;x&gt; mice attack'd the frogs,                   350<br/>

And made their mortal enemy,<br/>

The water-rat, their strict ally.<br/>

For 'tis not now, who's stout and bold,<br/>

But who bears hunger best, and cold;<br/>

And he's approv'd the most deserving,                         355<br/>

Who longest can hold out at starving;<br/>

And he that routs most pigs and cows,<br/>

The formidablest man of prowess.<br/>

So th' emperor CALIGULA,<br/>

That triumph'd o'er the British Sea,                          360<br/>

Took crabs and oysters prisoners,<br/>

Lobsters, 'stead of cuirasiers,<br/>

Engag'd his legions in fierce bustles<br/>

With periwinkles, prawns, and muscles;<br/>

And led his troops with furious gallops,                      365<br/>

To charge whole regiments of scallops<br/>

Not like their ancient way of war,<br/>

To wait on his triumphal carr<br/>

But when he went to dine or sup<br/>

More bravely eat his captives up;                             370<br/>

And left all war, by his example,<br/>

Reduc'd to vict'ling of a camp well.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00586">Quoth RALPH, By all that you have said,<br/>

And twice as much that I cou'd add,<br/>

'Tis plain you cannot now do worse,                           375<br/>

Than take this out-of-fashion'd course;<br/>

To hope, by stratagem, to woo her,<br/>

Or waging battle to subdue her<br/>

Though some have done it in romances,<br/>

And bang'd them into amorous fancies;                         380<br/>

As those who won the AMAZONS,<br/>

By wanton drubbing of their bones;<br/>

And stout &lt;y&gt; Rinaldo gain'd his bride,<br/>

By courting of her back and side.<br/>

But since those times and feats are over,                     385<br/>

They are not for a modern lover,<br/>

When mistresses are too cross-grain'd<br/>

By such addresses to be gain'd;<br/>

And if they were, wou'd have it out<br/>

With many another kind of bout.                               390<br/>

Therefore I hold no course s' infeasible,<br/>

As this of force to win the JEZEBEL;<br/>

To storm her heart, by th' antick charms<br/>

Of ladies errant, force of arms;<br/>

But rather strive by law to win her,                          395<br/>

And try the title you have in her.<br/>

Your case is clear; you have her word,<br/>

And me to witness the accord<br/>

Besides two more of her retinue<br/>

To testify what pass'd between you;                           400<br/>

More probable, and like to hold,<br/>

Than hand, or seal, or breaking gold;<br/>

For which so many, that renounc'd<br/>

Their plighted contracts, have been trounc'd<br/>

And bills upon record been found,                             405<br/>

That forc'd the ladies to compound;<br/>

And that, unless I miss the matter,<br/>

Is all the bus'ness you look after.<br/>

Besides, encounters at the bar<br/>

Are braver now than those in war,                             410<br/>

In which the law does execution<br/>

With less disorder and confusion<br/>

Has more of honour in't, some hold<br/>

Not like the new way, but the old<br/>

When those the pen had drawn together,                        415<br/>

Decided quarrels with the feather,<br/>

And winged arrows kill'd as dead,<br/>

And more than bullets now of lead.<br/>

So all their combats now, as then,<br/>

Are manag'd chiefly by the pen;                               420<br/>

That does the feat with braver vigours,<br/>

In words at length, as well as figures;<br/>

Is judge of all the world performs<br/>

In voluntary feats of arms<br/>

And whatsoe'er's atchiev'd in fight,                          425<br/>

Determines which is wrong or right:<br/>

For whether you prevail, or lose<br/>

All must be try'd there in the close;<br/>

And therefore  'tis not wise to shun<br/>

What you must trust to ere y' have done.                      430<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00587">The law, that settles all you do,<br/>

And marries where you did but woo;<br/>

That makes the most perfidious lover<br/>

A lady, that's as false, recover;<br/>

And if it judge upon your side,                               435<br/>

Will soon extend her for your bride;<br/>

And put her person, goods, or lands,<br/>

Or which you like best int' your hands.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00588">For law's the wisdom of all ages,<br/>

And manag'd by the ablest sages;                              440<br/>

Who, though their bus'ness at the bar<br/>

Be but a kind of civil war,<br/>

In which th' engage with fiercer dudgeons<br/>

Than e'er the GRECIANS did and TROJANS,<br/>

They never manage the contest                                 445<br/>

T' impair their public interest;<br/>

Or by their controversies lessen<br/>

The dignity of their profession:<br/>

Not like us Brethren, who divide<br/>

Our Commonwealth, the Cause, and Side;                        450<br/>

And though w' are all as near of kindred<br/>

As th' outward man is to the inward,<br/>

We agree in nothing, but to wrangle<br/>

About the slightest fingle-fangle;<br/>

While lawyers have more sober sense                           455<br/>

Than t' argue at their own expence,<br/>

But make their best advantages<br/>

Of others' quarrels, like the Swiss;<br/>

And, out of foreign controversies,<br/>

By aiding both sides, fill their purses;                      460<br/>

But have no int'rest in the cause<br/>

For which th' engage, and wage the laws;<br/>

Nor further prospect than their pay,<br/>

Whether they lose or win the day:<br/>

And though th' abounded in all ages,                          465<br/>

With sundry learned clerks and sages,<br/>

Though all their business be dispute,<br/>

Which way they canvass ev'ry suit,<br/>

Th' have no disputes about their art,<br/>

Nor in Polemicks controvert:                                  470<br/>

While all professions else are found<br/>

With nothing but disputes t' abound<br/>

Divines of all sorts, and physicians,<br/>

Philosophers, mathematicians:<br/>

The Galenist and Paracelsian                                  475<br/>

Condemn the way each other deals in:<br/>

Anatomists dissect and mangle,<br/>

To cut themselves out work to wrangle<br/>

Astrologers dispute their dreams,<br/>

That in their sleeps they talk of schemes:                    480<br/>

And heralds stickle, who got who<br/>

So many hundred years ago.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00589">But lawyers are too wise a nation<br/>

T' expose their trade to disputation;<br/>

Or make the busy rabble judges                                485<br/>

Of all their secret piques and grudges;<br/>

In which whoever wins the day,<br/>

The whole profession's sure to pay.<br/>

Beside, no mountebanks, nor cheats,<br/>

Dare undertake to do their feats,                             490<br/>

When in all other sciences<br/>

They swarm, like insects, and increase.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00590">For what bigot durst ever draw,<br/>

By inward light, a deed in law?<br/>

Or could hold forth, by revelation,                           495<br/>

An answer to a declaration?<br/>

For those that meddle with their tools<br/>

Will cut their fingers, if they're fools;<br/>

And if you follow their advice,<br/>

In bills, and answers, and replies,                           500<br/>

They'll write a love-letter in chancery,<br/>

Shall bring her upon oath to answer ye,<br/>

And soon reduce her to b' your wife,<br/>

Or make her weary of her life.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00591">The Knight, who us'd with tricks and shifts                   505<br/>

To edify by RALPHO's Gifts,<br/>

But in appearance cry'd him down,<br/>

To make them better seem his own,<br/>

(All Plagiaries' constant course<br/>

Of sinking when they take a purse),                           510<br/>

Resolv'd to follow his advice,<br/>

But kept it from him by disguise;<br/>

And, after stubborn contradiction,<br/>

To counterfeit his own conviction,<br/>

And by transition fall upon                                   515<br/>

The resolution as his own.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00592">Quoth he, This gambol thou advisest<br/>

Is of all others the unwisest;<br/>

For if I think by law to gain her,<br/>

There's nothing sillier or vainer                             520<br/>

'Tis but to hazard my pretence,<br/>

Where nothing's certain, but th' expence;<br/>

To act against myself, and traverse<br/>

My suit and title, to her favours<br/>

And if she shou'd (which Heav'n forbid)                       525<br/>

O'erthrow me, as the fidler did,<br/>

What aftercourse have I to take,<br/>

'Gainst losing all I have at stake?<br/>

He that with injury is griev'd,<br/>

And goes to law to be reliev'd,                               530<br/>

Is sillier than a sottish chowse,<br/>

Who, when thief has robb'd his house,<br/>

Applies himself to cunning men,<br/>

To help him to his goods agen;<br/>

When all he can expect to gain,                               535<br/>

Is but to squander more in vain;<br/>

And yet I have no other way<br/>

But is as difficult to play.<br/>

For to reduce her by main force,<br/>

Is now in vain; by fair means, worse;                         540<br/>

But worst of all, to give her over,<br/>

'Till she's as desp'rate to recover<br/>

For bad games are thrown up too soon,<br/>

Until th' are never to be won.<br/>

But since I have no other course,                             545<br/>

But is as bad t' attempt, or worse,<br/>

He that complies against his will,<br/>

Is of his own opinion still;<br/>

Which he may adhere to, yet disown,<br/>

For reasons to himself best known:                            550<br/>

But 'tis not to b' avoided now,<br/>

For SIDROPHEL resolves to sue;<br/>

Whom I must answer, or begin<br/>

Inevitably first with him.<br/>

For I've receiv'd advertisement,                              555<br/>

By times enough, of his intent;<br/>

And knowing he that first complains<br/>

Th' advantage of the business gains;<br/>

For Courts of Justice understand<br/>

The plaintiff to be eldest hand;                              560<br/>

Who what he pleases may aver;<br/>

The other, nothing, till he swear;<br/>

Is freely admitted to all grace,<br/>

And lawful favour, by his place;<br/>

And, for his bringing custom in,                              565<br/>

Has all advantages to win.<br/>

I, who resolve to oversee<br/>

No lucky opportunity,<br/>

Will go to council, to advise<br/>

Which way t' encounter, or surprize,                          570<br/>

And, after long consideration,<br/>

Have found out one to fit th' occasion;<br/>

Most apt for what I have to do,<br/>

As counsellor and justice too.<br/>

And truly so, no doubt, he was,                               575<br/>

A lawyer fit for such a case.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00593">An &lt;z&gt; old dull sot, who told the clock<br/>

For many years at Bridewell-dock,<br/>

At Westminster, and Hicks's-Hall,<br/>

And Hiccius Doctius play'd in all;                            580<br/>

Where, in all governments and times,<br/>

H' had been both friend and foe to crimes,<br/>

And us'd two equal ways of gaining<br/>

By hind'ring justice or maintaining;<br/>

To many a whore gave priviledge,                              585<br/>

And whipp'd for want of quarteridge:<br/>

Cart-loads of bawds to prison sent<br/>

For b'ing behind a fortnight's rent<br/>

And many a trusty pimp and croney<br/>

To &lt;a&gt; Puddle-dock for want of money;                         590<br/>

Engag'd the constable to seize<br/>

All those that would not break the peace,<br/>

Nor give him back his own foul words,<br/>

Though sometimes Commoners or Lords,<br/>

And kept 'em prisoners of course,                             595<br/>

For being sober at ill hours;<br/>

That in the morning he might free<br/>

Or bind 'em over for his fee;<br/>

Made &lt;b&gt; monsters fine, and puppet-plays,<br/>

For leave to practise in their ways;                          600<br/>

Farm'd out all cheats, and went a share<br/>

With th' headborough and scavenger;<br/>

And made the dirt i' th' streets compound<br/>

For taking up the publick ground;<br/>

The kennel, and the King's highway,                           605<br/>

For being unmolested, pay;<br/>

Let out the stocks, and whipping-post,<br/>

And cage, to those that gave him most;<br/>

Impos'd a tax on bakers' ears,<br/>

And for false weights on chandelers;                          610<br/>

Made victuallers and vintners fine<br/>

For arbitrary ale and wine;<br/>

But was a kind and constant friend<br/>

To all that regularly offend;<br/>

As residentiary bawds,                                        615<br/>

And brokers that receive stol'n goods;<br/>

That cheat in lawful mysteries,<br/>

And pay church duties and his fees;<br/>

But was implacable, and awkward,<br/>

To all that interlop'd and hawker'd.                          620<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00594">To this brave man the Knight repairs<br/>

For council in his law-affairs<br/>

And found him mounted in his pew,<br/>

With books and money plac'd for shew,<br/>

Like nest-eggs to make clients lay,                           625<br/>

And for his false opinion pay<br/>

To whom the knight, with comely grace,<br/>

Put off his hat to put his case<br/>

Which he as proudly entertain'd<br/>

As th' other courteously strain'd;                            630<br/>

And, to assure him 't was not that<br/>

He look'd for, bid him put on's hat.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00595">Quoth he, There is one SIDROPHEL,<br/>

Whom I have cudgell'd — Very well.<br/>

And now he brags t' have beaten me. —                        635<br/>

Better and better still, quoth he. —<br/>

And vows to stick me to a wall<br/>

Where-e'er he meets me — Best of all.<br/>

'Tis true, the knave has taken's oath<br/>

That I robb'd him — Well done, in troth                      640<br/>

When h' has confess'd he stole my cloak,<br/>

And pick'd my fob, and what he took;<br/>

Which was the cause that made me bang him,<br/>

And take my goods again — Marry hang him.<br/>

Now whether I should before-hand,                             645<br/>

Swear he robb'd me? — I understand.<br/>

Or bring my action of conversion<br/>

And trover for my goods? — Ah, Whoreson!<br/>

Or if 'tis better to indite,<br/>

And bring him to his trial? — Right.                         650<br/>

Prevent what he designs to do,<br/>

And swear for th' State against him? — True.<br/>

Or whether he that is defendant<br/>

In this case has the better end on't;<br/>

Who, putting in a new cross-bill,                             655<br/>

May traverse th' action? — Better still.<br/>

Then there's a Lady too — Aye, marry<br/>

That's easily prov'd accessary;<br/>

A widow, who, by solemn vows<br/>

Contracted to me for my spouse,                               660<br/>

Combin'd with him to break her word,<br/>

And has abetted all. — Good Lord<br/>

Suborn'd th' aforesaid SIDROPHEL<br/>

To tamper with the Dev'l of Hell;<br/>

Who put m' into a horrid fear,                                665<br/>

Fear of my life. — Make that appear.<br/>

Made an assault with fiends and men<br/>

Upon my body. — Good agen,<br/>

And kept me in a deadly fright,<br/>

And false imprisonment, all night                             670<br/>

Mean while they robb'd me, and my horse,<br/>

And stole my saddle. — Worse and worse.<br/>

And made me mount upon the bare ridge,<br/>

T' avoid a wretcheder miscarriage.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00596">Sir, quoth the Lawyer, not to flatter ye,                     675<br/>

You have as good and fair a battery<br/>

As heart can wish, and need not shame<br/>

The proudest man alive to claim.<br/>

For if th' have us'd you as you say;<br/>

Marry, quoth I, God give you joy.                             680<br/>

I wou'd it were my case, I'd give<br/>

More than I'll say, or you'll believe.<br/>

I would so trounce her, and her purse;<br/>

I'd make her kneel for better or worse;<br/>

For matrimony and hanging here                                685<br/>

Both go by destiny so clear,<br/>

That you as sure may pick and choose,<br/>

As Cross, I win; and, Pile, you lose;<br/>

And, if I durst, I would advance<br/>

As much in ready maintenance,                                 690<br/>

As upon any case I've known,<br/>

But we that practise dare not own.<br/>

The law severely contrabands<br/>

Our taking bus'ness off men's hands;<br/>

'Tis common barratry, that bears                              695<br/>

Point-blank an action 'gainst our ears<br/>

And crops them till there is not leather<br/>

To stick a pin in left of either;<br/>

For which some do the Summer-sault,<br/>

And o'er the bar, like tumblers, vault,                       700<br/>

But you may swear, at any rate,<br/>

Things not in nature, for the State;<br/>

For in all courts of justice here<br/>

A witness is not said to swear,<br/>

But make oath; that is, in plain terms,                       705<br/>

To forge whatever he affirms.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00597">(I thank you, quoth the Knight, for that,<br/>

Because 'tis to my purpose pat — )<br/>

For Justice, though she's painted blind,<br/>

Is to the weaker Side inclin'd,                               710<br/>

Like Charity; else right and wrong<br/>

Could never hold it out so long,<br/>

And, like blind Fortune, with a slight<br/>

Convey mens' interest and right<br/>

From &lt;c&gt; Stiles's pocket into Nokes's,                        715<br/>

As easily as Hocus Pocus;<br/>

Play fast and loose; make men obnoxious,<br/>

And clear again, like Hiccius Doctius.<br/>

Then whether you wou'd take her life,<br/>

Or but recover her for your wife,                             720<br/>

Or be content with what she has,<br/>

And let all other matters pass,<br/>

The bus'ness to the law's alone,<br/>

The proof is all it looks upon:<br/>

And you can want no witnesses                                 725<br/>

To swear to any thing you please,<br/>

That hardly get their mere expences<br/>

By th' labour of their consciences;<br/>

Or letting out to hire their ears<br/>

To affidavit customers,                                       730<br/>

At inconsiderable values,<br/>

To serve for jury-men or tallies,<br/>

Although retain'd in th' hardest matters,<br/>

Of trustees and administrators.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00598">For that, quoth he, let me alone;                             735<br/>

W' have store of such, and all our own;<br/>

Bred up and tutor'd by our teachers,<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00599">The ablest of conscience-stretchers.<br/>

That's well, quoth he; but I should guess,<br/>

By weighing all advantages,                                   740<br/>

Your surest way is first to pitch<br/>

On &lt;d&gt; BONGEY for a water-witch;<br/>

And when y' have hang'd the conjurer,<br/>

Y' have time enough to deal with her.<br/>

In th' int'rim, spare for no trepans                          745<br/>

To draw her neck into the bans<br/>

Ply her with love-letters and billets,<br/>

And bait 'em well, for quirks and quillets<br/>

With trains t' inveigle, and surprize,<br/>

Her heedless answers and replies;                             750<br/>

And if she miss the mouse-trap lines,<br/>

They'll serve for other by-designs;<br/>

And make an artist understand<br/>

To copy out her seal or hand;<br/>

Or find void places in the paper                              755<br/>

To steal in something to intrap her<br/>

Till, with her worldly goods and body,<br/>

Spight of her heart, she has endow'd ye,<br/>

Retain all sorts of witnesses,<br/>

That ply i' th' Temple under trees;                           760<br/>

Or walk the round, with knights o' th' posts,<br/>

About the cross-legg'd knights, their hosts;<br/>

Or wait for customers between<br/>

The pillars-rows in Lincoln's-Inn<br/>

Where vouchers, forgers, common-bail,                         765<br/>

And affidavit-men, ne'er fail<br/>

T' expose to sale all sorts of oaths,<br/>

According to their ears and cloaths,<br/>

Their only necessary tools,<br/>

Besides the Gospel and their souls;                           770<br/>

And when y' are furnish'd with all purveys,<br/>

I shall be ready at your service.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00600">I would not give, quoth HUDIBRAS,<br/>

A straw to understand a case,<br/>

Without the admirable skill                                   775<br/>

To wind and manage it at will;<br/>

To vere, and tack, and steer a cause<br/>

Against the weather-gage of laws;<br/>

And ring the changes upon cases<br/>

As plain as noses upon faces,                                 780<br/>

As you have well instructed me,<br/>

For which you've earn'd (here 'tis) your fee.<br/>

I long to practise your advice,<br/>

And try the subtle artifice;<br/>

To bait a letter, as you bid;                                 785<br/>

As not long after, thus he did<br/>

For having pump'd up all his wit,<br/>

And humm'd upon it, thus he writ.<br/>
</p>

<h4 id="id00601" style="margin-top: 2em">NOTES TO PART III CANTO III.</h4>

<p id="id00602" style="margin-top: 2em">8 q Than Hags with all their Imps and Teats.] Alluding to the
vulgar opinion, that witches have their imps, or familiar spirits,
that are employed in their diabolical practices, and suck private
teats they have about them.</p>

<p id="id00603">15 r As Rosi-crucian Virtuosos, &amp;c.] The Rosicrusians were a
sect that appeared in Germany in the beginning of the XVIIth
age. They are also called the Enlightened, Immortal, and
Invisible. They are a very enthusiastical sort of men, and hold
many wild and extravagant opinions.</p>

<p id="id00604">36 s From Marshal Legion's Regiment.] He used to preach, as if
they might expect legions to drop down from heaven, for the
propagation of the good Old Cause.</p>

<p id="id00605">145 t More plainly than the Reverend Writer, &amp;c.] A most
Reverend Prelate, A. B. of Y. who sided with the disaffected
party.</p>

<p id="id00606">261 u If the Ancients crown'd their bravest Men, &amp;c.] The
Romans highly honoured, and nobly rewarded, those persons
that were instrumental in the preservation of the lives of their
citizens, either in battle or otherwise</p>

<p id="id00607">305 w Or else their Sultan Populaces, &amp;c.] The Author
compares the arbitrary actings of the ungovernable mob to the
Sultan or Grand Signior, who very seldom fails to sacrifice any
of his chief commanders, called Bassas, if they prove
unsuccessful in battle.</p>

<p id="id00608">350 x As the ancient Mice attack'd the Frogs.) Homer wrote a
poem of the War between the Mice and the Frogs.</p>

<p id="id00609">383 y And stout Rinaldo gain'd his Bride, &amp;c.] A story in Tasso,
an Italian Poet, of a hero that gained his mistress by conquering
her party.</p>

<p id="id00610">577 z An old dull Sot, who told the Clock, &amp;c.] Prideux, a
justice of peace, a very pragmatical busy person in those times,
and a mercenary and cruel magistrate, infamous for the
following methods of getting of money among many others.</p>

<p id="id00611">589 a And many a trusty Pimp and Croney, &amp;c.] There was a
gaol for puny offenders.</p>

<p id="id00612">599 b Made Monsters fine, and Puppet-plays, &amp;c.] He extorted
money from those that kept shows.</p>

<p id="id00613">715 c From Stiles's Pocket into Nokes's, &amp;c.] John a Nokes, and
John a Stiles, are two fictitious names made use of in stating
cases of law only.</p>

<p id="id00614">742 d On BONGEY for a Water Witch.] Bongey was a
Franciscan, and lived towards the end of the thirteenth century,
a doctor of divinity in Oxford; and a particular acquaintance of
Friar Bacon's. In that ignorant age, every thing that seemed
extraordinary was reputed magick; and so both Bacon and
Bongey went under the imputation of studying the black-art.
Bongey also, publishing a treatise of Natural Magick, confirmed
some well-meaning credulous people in this opinion; but it was
altogether groundless; for Bongey was chosen provincial of his
order, being a person of most excellent parts and piety.</p>

<h3 id="id00615" style="margin-top: 3em">AN HEROICAL EPISTLE OF HUDIBRAS TO HIS LADY.</h3>

<p id="id00616" style="margin-top: 2em">I who was once as great as CAESAR,<br/>

Am now reduc'd to NEBUCHADNEZZAR;<br/>

And from as fam'd a conqueror<br/>

As ever took degree in war,<br/>

Or did his exercise in battle,                                  5<br/>

By you turn'd out to grass with cattle:<br/>

For since I am deny'd access<br/>

To all my earthly happiness<br/>

Am fallen from the paradise<br/>

Of your good graces, and fair eyes;                            10<br/>

Lost to the world, and you, I'm sent<br/>

To everlasting banishment;<br/>

Where all the hopes I had t' have won<br/>

Your heart, b'ing dash'd, will break my own.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00617">Yet if you were not so severe                                  15<br/>

To pass your doom before you hear,<br/>

You'd find, upon my just defence,<br/>

How much y' have wrong'd my innocence.<br/>

That once I made a vow to you,<br/>

Which yet is unperformed, 'tis true:                           20<br/>

But not because it is unpaid,<br/>

'Tis violated, though delay'd;<br/>

Or, if it were, it is no fau't,<br/>

So heinous as you'd have it thought;<br/>

To undergo the loss of ears,                                   25<br/>

Like vulgar hackney perjurers<br/>

For there's a diff'rence in the case,<br/>

Between the noble and the base,<br/>

Who always are observ'd t' have done't<br/>

Upon as different an account:                                  30<br/>

The one for great and weighty cause,<br/>

To salve in honour ugly flaws;<br/>

For none are like to do it sooner<br/>

Than those who are nicest of their honour:<br/>

The other, for base gain and pay,                              35<br/>

Forswear, and perjure by the day;<br/>

And make th' exposing and retailing<br/>

Their souls and consciences a calling.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00618">It is no scandal, nor aspersion,<br/>

Upon a great and noble person,                                 40<br/>

To say he nat'rally abhorr'd<br/>

Th' old-fashion'd trick, To keep his word;<br/>

Though 'tis perfidiousness and shame<br/>

In meaner men to do the same:<br/>

For to be able to forget,                                      45<br/>

Is found more useful to the great,<br/>

Than gout, or deafness, or bad eyes,<br/>

To make 'em pass for wond'rous wise.<br/>

But though the law on perjurers<br/>

Inflicts the forfeiture of ears,                               50<br/>

It is not just that does exempt<br/>

The guilty, and punish th' innocent;<br/>

To make the ears repair the wrong<br/>

Committed by th' ungovern'd tongue;<br/>

And when one member is forsworn,                               55<br/>

Another to be cropt or torn.<br/>

And if you shou'd, as you design,<br/>

By course of law, recover mine,<br/>

You're like, if you consider right,<br/>

To gain but little honour by't.                                60<br/>

For he that for his lady's sake<br/>

Lays down his life or limbs at stake,<br/>

Does not so much deserve her favour,<br/>

As he that pawns his soul to have her,<br/>

This y' have acknowledg'd I have done,                         65<br/>

Although you now disdain to own;<br/>

But sentence what you rather ought<br/>

T' esteem good service than a fau't.<br/>

Besides, oaths are not bound to bear<br/>

That literal sense the words infer,                            70<br/>

But, by the practice of the age,<br/>

Are to be judg'd how far th' engage;<br/>

And, where the sense by custom's checkt,<br/>

Are found void, and of none effect.<br/>

For no man takes or keeps a vow                                75<br/>

But just as he sees others do;<br/>

Nor are th' oblig'd to be so brittle,<br/>

As not to yield and bow a little:<br/>

For as best-temper'd blades are found,<br/>

Before they break, to bend quite round,                        80<br/>

So truest oaths are still most tough,<br/>

And though they bow, are breaking proof.<br/>

Then wherefore should they not b' allow'd<br/>

In love a greater latitude?<br/>

For as the law of arms approves                                85<br/>

All ways to conquest, so should love's;<br/>

And not be ty'd to true or false,<br/>

But make that justest that prevails<br/>

For how can that which is above<br/>

All empire, high and mighty love,                              90<br/>

Submit its great prerogative<br/>

To any other power alive?<br/>

Shall love, that to no crown gives place,<br/>

Become the subject of a case?<br/>

The fundamental law of nature,                                 95<br/>

Be over-rul'd by those made after?<br/>

Commit the censure of its cause<br/>

To any but its own great laws?<br/>

Love, that's the world's preservative,                        100<br/>

That keeps all souls of things alive;<br/>

Controuls the mighty pow'r of fate,<br/>

And gives mankind a longer date;<br/>

The life of nature, that restores<br/>

As fast as time and death devours;<br/>

To whose free-gift the world does owe,                        105<br/>

Not only earth, but heaven too;<br/>

For love's the only trade that's driven,<br/>

The interest of state in heav'n,<br/>

Which nothing but the soul of man<br/>

Is capable to entertain.                                      110<br/>

For what can earth produce, but love<br/>

To represent the joys above?<br/>

Or who but lovers can converse,<br/>

Like angels, by &lt;e&gt; the eye-discourse?<br/>

Address and compliment by vision;                             115<br/>

Make love and court by intuition?<br/>

And burn in amorous flames as fierce<br/>

As those celestial ministers?<br/>

Then how can any thing offend,<br/>

In order to so great an end?                                  120<br/>

Or heav'n itself a sin &lt;f&gt; resent,<br/>

That for its own supply was meant?<br/>

That merits, in a kind mistake,<br/>

A pardon for th' offence's sake.<br/>

Or if it did not, but the cause                               125<br/>

Were left to th' injury at laws,<br/>

What tyranny can disapprove<br/>

There should be equity in love;<br/>

For laws that are inanimate,<br/>

And feel no sense of love or hate,                            130<br/>

That have no passion of their own,<br/>

Nor pity to be wrought upon,<br/>

Are only proper to inflict<br/>

Revenge on criminals as strict<br/>

But to have power to forgive,                                 135<br/>

Is empire and prerogative;<br/>

And 'tis in crowns a nobler gem<br/>

To grant a pardon than condemn.<br/>

Then since so few do what they ought,<br/>

'Tis great t' indulge a well-meant fau't.                     140<br/>

For why should he who made address,<br/>

All humble ways, without success,<br/>

And met with nothing, in return,<br/>

But insolence, affronts, and scorn,<br/>

Not strive by wit to countermine,                             145<br/>

And bravely carry his design?<br/>

He who was us'd so unlike a soldier,<br/>

Blown up with philters of love-powder?<br/>

And after letting blood, and purging,<br/>

Condemn'd to voluntary scourging;                             150<br/>

Alarm'd with many a horrid fright,<br/>

And claw'd by goblins in the night;<br/>

Insulted on, revil'd, and jeer'd,<br/>

With rude invasion of his beard;<br/>

And when your sex was foully scandal'd,                       155<br/>

As foully by the rabble handled;<br/>

Attack'd by despicable foes,<br/>

And drub'd with mean and vulgar blows;<br/>

And, after all, to be debarr'd<br/>

So much as standing on his guard;                             160<br/>

When horses, being spurr'd and prick'd,<br/>

Have leave to kick for being kick'd?<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00619">Or why should you, whose mother-wits<br/>

Are furnish'd with all perquisites,<br/>

That with your breeding-teeth begin,                          165<br/>

And nursing babies, that lie in,<br/>

B' allow'd to put all tricks upon<br/>

Our cully sex, and we use none?<br/>

We, who have nothing but frail vows<br/>

Against your stratagems t' oppose;                            170<br/>

Or oaths more feeble than your own,<br/>

By which we are no less put down?<br/>

You wound, like &lt;g&gt; Parthians, while you fly,<br/>

And kill with a retreating eye:<br/>

Retire the more, the more we press                            175<br/>

To draw us into ambushes.<br/>

As pirates all false colours wear<br/>

T' intrap th' unwary mariner,<br/>

So women, to surprise us, spread<br/>

The borrow'd flags of white and red;                          180<br/>

Display 'em thicker on their cheeks<br/>

Than their old grandmothers, the Picts;<br/>

And raise more devils with their looks,<br/>

Than conjurer's less subtle books;<br/>

Lay trains of amorous intrigues,                              185<br/>

In tow'rs, and curls, and perriwigs,<br/>

With greater art and cunning rear'd,<br/>

Than &lt;h&gt; PHILIP NYE's thanksgiving beard,<br/>

Prepost'rously t' entice, and gain<br/>

Those to adore 'em they disdain;                              190<br/>

And only draw 'em in, to clog<br/>

With idle names a catalogue.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00620">A lover is, the more he's brave,<br/>

T' his mistress but the more a slave;<br/>

And whatsoever she commands,                                  195<br/>

Becomes a favour from her hands;<br/>

Which he's obliged t' obey, and must,<br/>

Whether it be unjust or just.<br/>

Then when he is compell'd by her<br/>

T' adventures he would else forbear,                          200<br/>

Who with his honour can withstand,<br/>

Since force is greater than command?<br/>

And when necessity's obey'd,<br/>

Nothing can be unjust or bad<br/>

And therefore when the mighty pow'rs                          205<br/>

Of love, our great ally and yours,<br/>

Join'd forces not to be withstood<br/>

By frail enamour'd flesh and blood,<br/>

All I have done, unjust or ill,<br/>

Was in obedience to your will;                                210<br/>

And all the blame that can be due,<br/>

Falls to your cruelty and you.<br/>

Nor are those scandals I confest,<br/>

Against my will and interest,<br/>

More than is daily done of course                             215<br/>

By all men, when they're under force;<br/>

When some upon the rack confess<br/>

What th' hangman and their prompters please;<br/>

But are no sooner out of pain,<br/>

Than they deny it all again.                                  220<br/>

But when the Devil turns confessor,<br/>

Truth is a crime he takes no pleasure<br/>

To hear, or pardon, like the founder<br/>

Of liars, whom they all claim under<br/>

And therefore, when I told him none,                          225<br/>

I think it was the wiser done.<br/>

Nor am I without precedent,<br/>

The first that on th' adventure went<br/>

All mankind ever did of course,<br/>

And daily dues the same, or worse.                            230<br/>

For what romance can show a lover,<br/>

That had a lady to recover,<br/>

And did not steer a nearer course,<br/>

To fall a-board on his amours?<br/>

And what at first was held a crime,                           235<br/>

Has turn'd to honourable in time.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00621">To what a height did &lt;i&gt; infant ROME,<br/>

By ravishing of women, come<br/>

When men upon their spouses seiz'd,<br/>

And freely marry'd where they pleas'd,                        240<br/>

They ne'er forswore themselves, nor ly'd.<br/>

Nor, in the mind they were in, dy'd;<br/>

Nor took the pains t' address and sue,<br/>

Nor play'd the masquerade to woo;<br/>

Disdain'd to stay for friends' consents;                      245<br/>

Nor juggled about settlements:<br/>

Did need no license, nor no priest,<br/>

Nor friends, nor kindred, to assist;<br/>

Nor lawyers, to join land and money<br/>

In th' holy state of matrimony,                               250<br/>

Before they settled hands and hearts,<br/>

Till &lt;k&gt; alimony or death them parts:<br/>

Nor wou'd endure to stay until<br/>

Th' had got the very bride's good will;<br/>

But took a wise and shorter course                            255<br/>

To win the ladies, downright force.<br/>

And justly made 'em prisoners then,<br/>

As they have often since, us men,<br/>

With acting plays, and dancing jigs,<br/>

The luckiest of all love's intrigues;                         260<br/>

And when they had them at their pleasure,<br/>

Then talk'd of love and flames at leisure;<br/>

For after matrimony's over,<br/>

He that holds out but half a lover,<br/>

Deserves for ev'ry minute more                                265<br/>

Than half a year of love before;<br/>

For which the dames in contemplation<br/>

Of that best way of application,<br/>

Prov'd nobler wives than e'er was known,<br/>

By suit or treaty to be won;                                  270<br/>

And such as all posterity<br/>

Cou'd never equal nor come nigh.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00622">For women first were made for men,<br/>

Not men for them. — It follows, then,<br/>

That men have right to ev'ry one,                             275<br/>

And they no freedom of their own<br/>

And therefore men have pow'r to chuse,<br/>

But they no charter to refuse.<br/>

Hence 'tis apparent, that what course<br/>

Soe'er we take to your amours,                                280<br/>

Though by the indirectest way,<br/>

'Tis no injustice, nor foul play;<br/>

And that you ought to take that course,<br/>

As we take you, for better or worse;<br/>

And gratefully submit to those                                285<br/>

Who you, before another, chose.<br/>

For why should ev'ry savage beast<br/>

Exceed his great lord's interest?<br/>

Have freer pow'r than he in grace,<br/>

And nature, o'er the creature has?                            290<br/>

Because the laws he since has made<br/>

Have cut off all the pow'r he had;<br/>

Retrench'd the absolute dominion<br/>

That nature gave him over women;<br/>

When all his pow'r will not extend                            295<br/>

One law of nature to suspend;<br/>

And but to offer to repeal<br/>

The smallest clause, is to rebel.<br/>

This, if men rightly understood<br/>

Their privilege, they wou'd make good;                        300<br/>

And not, like sots, permit their wives<br/>

T' encroach on their prerogatives;<br/>

For which sin they deserve to be<br/>

Kept, as they are, in slavery:<br/>

And this some precious Gifted Teachers,                       305<br/>

Unrev'rently reputed leachers,<br/>

And disobey'd in making love,<br/>

Have vow'd to all the world to prove,<br/>

And make ye suffer, as you ought,<br/>

For that uncharitable fau't.                                  310<br/>

But I forget myself, and rove<br/>

Beyond th' instructions of my love.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00623">Forgive me (Fair) and only blame<br/>

Th' extravagancy of my flame,<br/>

Since 'tis too much at once to show                           315<br/>

Excess of love and temper too.<br/>

All I have said that's bad and true,<br/>

Was never meant to aim at you,<br/>

Who have so sov'reign a controul<br/>

O'er that poor slave of yours, my soul,                       320<br/>

That, rather than to forfeit you,<br/>

Has ventur'd loss of heaven too:<br/>

Both with an equal pow'r possest,<br/>

To render all that serve you blest:<br/>

But none like him, who's destin'd either                      325<br/>

To have, or lose you, both together.<br/>

And if you'll but this fault release<br/>

(For so it must be, since you please)<br/>

I'll pay down all that vow, and more,<br/>

Which you commanded, and I swore,                             330<br/>

And expiate upon my skin<br/>

Th' arrears in full of all my sin.<br/>

For 'tis but just that I should pay<br/>

Th' accruing penance for delay,<br/>

Which shall be done, until it move                            335<br/>

Your equal pity and your love.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00624">The Knight, perusing this Epistle,<br/>

Believ'd h' had brought her to his whistle;<br/>

And read it like a jocund lover,<br/>

With great applause t' himself, twice over;                   340<br/>

Subscrib'd his name, but at a fit<br/>

And humble distance to his wit;<br/>

And dated it with wond'rous art,<br/>

Giv'n from the bottom of his heart;<br/>

Then seal'd it with his Coat of Love,                         345<br/>

A smoaking faggot — and above,<br/>

Upon a scroll — I burn, and weep;<br/>

And near it — For her Ladyship;<br/>

Of all her sex most excellent,<br/>

These to her gentle hands present.                            350<br/>

Then gave it to his faithful Squire,<br/>

With lessons how t' observe and eye her.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00625">She first consider'd which was better,<br/>

To send it back, or burn the letter.<br/>

But guessing that it might import,                            355<br/>

Though nothing else, at least her sport,<br/>

She open'd it, and read it out,<br/>

With many a smile and leering flout:<br/>

Resolv'd to answer it in kind,<br/>

And thus perform'd what she design'd.                         360<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00626" style="margin-top: 3em">NOTES ON HUDIBRAS's EPISTLE TO HIS LADY.</p>

<p id="id00627" style="margin-top: 2em">113 e Or who but Lovers can converse, &amp;c.] Metaphysicians are
of opinion, that angels and souls departed, being divested of all
gross matter, understand each other's sentiments by intuition,
and consequently maintain a sort of conversation without the
organs of speech.</p>

<p id="id00628">121 f Or Heav'n itself a Sin resent, &amp;c.] In regard children are
capable of being inhabitants of Heaven, therefore it should not
resent it as a crime to supply store of inhabitants for it.</p>

<p id="id00629">173 g You wound like Parthians while you fly, &amp;c.] Parthians
are the inhabitants of a province in Persia: They were excellent
horsemen, and very exquisite at their bows; and it is reported of
them, that they generally slew more on their retreat than they
did in the engagement.</p>

<p id="id00630">188 h Than Philip Nye's Thanksgiving Beard ] One of the
Assembly of Divines, very remarkable for the singularity of his
beard.</p>

<p id="id00631">237 i To what a Height did Infant Rome, &amp;c.] When Romulus
had built Rome, he made it an asylum, or place of refuge, for all
malefactors, and others obnoxious to the laws to retire to; by
which means it soon came to be very populous; but when he
began to consider, that, without propagation, it would soon be
destitute of inhabitants, he invented several fine shows, and
invited the young Sabine women, then neighbours to them; and
when they had them secure, they ravished them; from whence
proceeded so numerous an offspring.</p>

<p id="id00632">252 k Till Alimony or Death them parts.] Alimony is an
allowance that the law gives the woman for her separate
maintenance upon living from her husband. That and death are
reckoned the only separations in a married state.</p>

<h3 id="id00633" style="margin-top: 3em">THE LADY'S ANSWER TO THE KNIGHT.</h3>

<p id="id00634" style="margin-top: 2em">THAT you're a beast, and turn'd to grass,<br/>

Is no strange news, nor ever was;<br/>

At least to me, who once you know,<br/>

Did from the pound replevin you,<br/>

When both your sword and spurs were won                         5<br/>

In combat by an Amazon.<br/>

That sword, that did (like Fate) determine<br/>

Th' inevitable death of vermine,<br/>

And never dealt its furious blows,<br/>

But cut the throats of pigs and cows,                          10<br/>

By TRULLA was, in single fight,<br/>

Disarm'd and wrested from its knight;<br/>

Your heels degraded of your spurs,<br/>

And in the stocks close prisoners;<br/>

Where still they'd lain, in base restraint,                    15<br/>

If I, in pity of your complaint,<br/>

Had not on honourable conditions,<br/>

Releast 'em from the worst of prisons<br/>

And what return that favour met<br/>

You cannot (though you wou'd) forget;                          20<br/>

When, being free, you strove t' evade<br/>

The oaths you had in prison made;<br/>

Forswore yourself; and first deny'd it,<br/>

But after own'd and justify'd it<br/>

And when y' had falsely broke one vow,                         25<br/>

Absolv'd yourself by breaking two.<br/>

For while you sneakingly submit,<br/>

And beg for pardon at our feet,<br/>

Discourag'd by your guilty fears,<br/>

To hope for quarter for your ears,                             30<br/>

And doubting 'twas in vain to sue,<br/>

You claim us boldly as your due;<br/>

Declare that treachery and force,<br/>

To deal with us, is th' only course;<br/>

We have no title nor pretence                                  35<br/>

To body, soul, or conscience;<br/>

But ought to fall to that man's share<br/>

That claims us for his proper ware.<br/>

These are the motives which, t' induce<br/>

Or fright us into love, you use.                               40<br/>

A pretty new way of gallanting,<br/>

Between soliciting and ranting;<br/>

Like sturdy beggars, that intreat<br/>

For charity at once, and threat.<br/>

But since you undertake to prove                               45<br/>

Your own propriety in love,<br/>

As if we were but lawful prize<br/>

In war between two enemies,<br/>

Or forfeitures, which ev'ry lover,<br/>

That wou'd but sue for, might recover,                         50<br/>

It is not hard to understand<br/>

The myst'ry of this bold demand,<br/>

That cannot at our persons aim,<br/>

But something capable of claim.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00635">'Tis not those paultry counterfeit                             55<br/>

French stones, which in our eyes you set,<br/>

But our right diamonds, that inspire<br/>

And set your am'rous hearts on fire.<br/>

Nor can those false St. Martin's beads,<br/>

Which on our lips you lay for reds,                            60<br/>

And make us wear, like Indian dames,<br/>

Add fuel to your scorching flames;<br/>

But those true rubies of the rock,<br/>

Which in our cabinets we lock.<br/>

'Tis not those orient pearls our teeth,                        65<br/>

That you are so transported with;<br/>

But those we wear about our necks,<br/>

Produce those amorous effects.<br/>

Nor is't those threads of gold, our hair,<br/>

The periwigs you make us wear,                                 70<br/>

But those bright guineas in our chests,<br/>

That light the wild fire in your breasts.<br/>

These love-tricks I've been vers'd in so,<br/>

That all their sly intrigues I know,<br/>

And can unriddle, by their tones,                              75<br/>

Their mystick cabals and jargones;<br/>

Can tell what passions, by their sounds,<br/>

Pine for the beauties of my grounds;<br/>

What raptures fond and amorous<br/>

O' th' charms and graces of my house;                          80<br/>

What extasy and scorching flame,<br/>

Burns for my money in my name;<br/>

What from th' unnatural desire<br/>

To beasts and cattle takes its fire;<br/>

What tender sigh, and trickling tear,                          85<br/>

Longs for a thousand pounds a year;<br/>

And languishing transports are fond<br/>

Of statute, mortgage, bill, and bond.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00636">These are th' attracts which most men fall<br/>

Inamour'd, at first sight, withal                              90<br/>

To these th' address with serenades,<br/>

And court with balls and masquerades;<br/>

And yet, for all the yearning pain<br/>

Y' have suffer'd for their loves in vain,<br/>

I fear they'll prove so nice and coy                           95<br/>

To have, and t' hold and to enjoy<br/>

That all your oaths and labour lost,<br/>

They'll ne'er turn ladies of the post.<br/>

This is not meant to disapprove<br/>

Your judgment in your choice of love;                         100<br/>

Which is so wise, the greatest part<br/>

Of mankind study 't as an art;<br/>

For love shou'd, like a deodand,<br/>

Still fall to th' owner of the land;<br/>

And where there's substance for its ground,                   105<br/>

Cannot but be more firm and sound<br/>

Than that which has the slightest basis<br/>

Of airy virtue, wit, and graces;<br/>

Which is of such thin subtlety,<br/>

It steals and creeps in at the eye,                           110<br/>

And, as it can't endure to stay,<br/>

Steals out again as nice a way.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00637">But love, that its extraction owns<br/>

From solid gold and precious stones<br/>

Must, like its shining parents, prove                         115<br/>

As solid and as glorious love.<br/>

Hence 'tis you have no way t'express<br/>

Our charms and graces but by these:<br/>

For what are lips, and eyes, and teeth,<br/>

Which beauty invades and conquers with,                       120<br/>

But rubies, pearls, and diamonds,<br/>

With which a philter-love commands?<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00638">This is the way all parents prove,<br/>

In managing their childrens' love;<br/>

That force 'em t' intermarry and wed,                         125<br/>

As if th' were bur'ing of the dead;<br/>

Cast earth to earth, as in the grave,<br/>

To join in wedlock all they have:<br/>

And when the settlement's in force,<br/>

Take all the rest for better or worse;                        130<br/>

For money has a power above<br/>

The stars and fate to manage love;<br/>

Whose arrows, learned poets hold,<br/>

That never miss, are tipp'd with gold.<br/>

And though some say, the parents' claims                      135<br/>

To make love in their childrens' names,<br/>

Who many times at once provide<br/>

The nurse, the husband, and the bride<br/>

Feel darts and charms, attracts and flames,<br/>

And woo and contract in their names;                          140<br/>

And as they christen, use to marry 'em,<br/>

And, like their gossips, answer for 'em;<br/>

Is not to give in matrimony,<br/>

But sell and prostitute for money;<br/>

'Tis better than their own betrothing,                        145<br/>

Who often do't for worse than nothing;<br/>

And when th' are at their own dispose,<br/>

With greater disadvantage choose.<br/>

All this is right; but for the course<br/>

You take to do't, by fraud or force,                          150<br/>

'Tis so ridiculous, as soon<br/>

As told, 'tis never to be done;<br/>

No more than setters can betray,<br/>

That tell what tricks they are to play.<br/>

Marriage, at best, is but a vow,                              155<br/>

Which all men either break or bow:<br/>

Then what will those forbear to do,<br/>

Who perjure when they do but woo?<br/>

Such as before-hand swear and lie<br/>

For earnest to their treachery;                               160<br/>

And, rather than a crime confess,<br/>

With greater strive to make it less;<br/>

Like thieves, who, after sentence past,<br/>

Maintain their innocence to the last;<br/>

And when their crimes were made appear                        165<br/>

As plain as witnesses can swear,<br/>

Yet, when the wretches come to die,<br/>

Will take upon their death a lie,<br/>

Nor are the virtues you confest<br/>

T' your ghostly father, as you guest,                         170<br/>

So slight as to be justify'd<br/>

By being as shamefully deny'd,<br/>

As if you thought your word would pass<br/>

Point-blank on both sides of a case;<br/>

Or credit were not to be lost                                 175<br/>

B' a brave Knight-Errant of the Post,<br/>

That eats perfidiously his word,<br/>

And swears his ears through a two inch board:<br/>

Can own the same thing, and disown,<br/>

And perjure booty, Pro and Con:                               180<br/>

Can make the Gospel serve his turn,<br/>

And help him out, to be forsworn;<br/>

When 'tis laid hands upon, and kist,<br/>

To be betray'd and sold like Christ.<br/>

These are the virtues in whose name                           185<br/>

A right to all the world you claim,<br/>

And boldly challenge a dominion,<br/>

In grace and nature, o'er all women;<br/>

Of whom no less will satisfy<br/>

Than all the sex your tyranny,                                190<br/>

Although you'll find it a hard province,<br/>

With all your crafty frauds and covins,<br/>

To govern such a num'rous crew,<br/>

Who, one by one, now govern you:<br/>

For if you all were SOLOMONS,                                 195<br/>

And wise and great as he was once,<br/>

You'll find they're able to subdue<br/>

(As they did him) and baffle you.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00639">And if you are impos'd upon<br/>

'Tis by your own temptation done,                             200<br/>

That with your ignorance invite;<br/>

And teach us how to use the slight.<br/>

For when we find y' are still more taken<br/>

With false attracts of our own making;<br/>

Swear that's a rose, and that a stone,                        205<br/>

Like sots, to us that laid it on,<br/>

And what we did but slightly prime,<br/>

Most ignorantly daub in rhime;<br/>

You force us, in our own defences,<br/>

To copy beams and influences;                                 210<br/>

To lay perfections on the graces,<br/>

And draw attracts upon our faces;<br/>

And, in compliance to your wit,<br/>

Your own false jewels counterfeit.<br/>

For, by the practice of those arts                            215<br/>

We gain a greater share of hearts;<br/>

And those deserve in reason most<br/>

That greatest pains and study cost;<br/>

For great perfections are, like heaven,<br/>

Too rich a present to be given.                               220<br/>

Nor are these master-strokes of beauty<br/>

To be perform'd without hard duty,<br/>

Which, when they're nobly done and well,<br/>

The simple natural excell.<br/>

How fair and sweet the planted rose                           225<br/>

Beyond the wild in hedges grows!<br/>

For without art the noblest seeds<br/>

Of flow'rs degen'rate into weeds.<br/>

How dull and rugged, e're 'tis ground<br/>

And polish'd, looks a diamond!                                230<br/>

Though Paradise were e'er so fair,<br/>

It was not kept so without care.<br/>

The whole world, without art and dress,<br/>

Would be but one great wilderness;<br/>

And mankind but a savage herd,                                235<br/>

For all that nature has conferr'd.<br/>

This does but rough-hew, and design;<br/>

Leaves art to polish and refine.<br/>

Though women first were made for men,<br/>

Yet men were made for them agen;                              240<br/>

For when (outwitted by his wife)<br/>

Man first turn'd tenant but for life,<br/>

If women had not interven'd,<br/>

How soon had mankind had an end!<br/>

And that it is in being yet,                                  245<br/>

To us alone you are in debt.<br/>

And where's your liberty of choice,<br/>

And our unnatural No Voice?<br/>

Since all the privilege you boast,<br/>

And falsly usurp'd, or vainly lost,                           250<br/>

Is now our right; to whose creation<br/>

You owe your happy restoration:<br/>

And if we had not weighty cause<br/>

To not appear, in making laws,<br/>

We could, in spite of all your tricks,                        255<br/>

And shallow, formal politicks,<br/>

Force you our managements t' obey,<br/>

As we to yours (in shew) give way.<br/>

Hence 'tis that, while you vainly strive<br/>

T' advance your high prerogative,                             260<br/>

You basely, after all your braves,<br/>

Submit, and own yourselves our slaves;<br/>

And 'cause we do not make it known,<br/>

Nor publickly our int'rest own,<br/>

Like sots, suppose we have no shares                          265<br/>

In ord'ring you and your affairs;<br/>

When all your empire and command<br/>

You have from us at second hand<br/>

As if a pilot, that appears<br/>

To sit still only while he steers,                            270<br/>

And does not make a noise and stir<br/>

Like ev'ry common mariner,<br/>

Knew nothing of the card, nor star,<br/>

And did not guide the man of war;<br/>

Nor we, because we don't appear                               275<br/>

In councils, do not govern there;<br/>

While, like the mighty &lt;m&gt; PRESTER JOHN,<br/>

Whose person none dares look upon,<br/>

But is preserv'd in close disguise,<br/>

From being made cheap to vulgar eyes,                         280<br/>

W' enjoy as large a pow'r unseen,<br/>

To govern him, as he does men;<br/>

And in the right of our Pope JOAN,<br/>

Make Emp'rors at our feet fall down;<br/>

Or &lt;n&gt; JOAN DE PUCEL'S braver name,                           285<br/>

Our right to arms and conduct claim;<br/>

Who, though a Spinster, yet was able<br/>

To serve FRANCE for a Grand Constable.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00640">We make and execute all laws;<br/>

Can judge the judges and the cause;                           290<br/>

Prescribe all rules of right or wrong<br/>

To th' long robe, and the longer tongue;<br/>

'Gainst which the world has no defence;<br/>

But our more pow'rful eloquence.<br/>

We manage things of greatest weight                           295<br/>

In all the world's affairs of state<br/>

Are ministers of war and peace,<br/>

That sway all nations how we please.<br/>

We rule all churches and their flocks,<br/>

Heretical and orthodox;                                       300<br/>

And are the heavenly vehicles<br/>

O' th' spirits in all conventicles.<br/>

By us is all commerce and trade<br/>

Improv'd, and manag'd, and decay'd;<br/>

For nothing can go off so well,                               305<br/>

Nor bears that price, as what we sell.<br/>

We rule in ev'ry publique meeting,<br/>

And make men do what we judge fitting;<br/>

Are magistrates in all great towns,<br/>

Where men do nothing but wear gowns.                          310<br/>

We make the man of war strike sail,<br/>

And to our braver conduct veil,<br/>

And, when h' has chac'd his enemies,<br/>

Submit to us upon his knees.<br/>

Is there an officer of state                                  315<br/>

Untimely rais'd, or magistrate,<br/>

That's haughty and imperious?<br/>

He's but a journeyman to us.<br/>

That as he gives us cause to do't,<br/>

Can keep him in, or turn him out.                             320<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00641">We are your guardians, that increase<br/>

Or waste your fortunes how we please;<br/>

And, as you humour us, can deal<br/>

In all your matters, ill or well.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00642">'Tis we that can dispose alone,                               325<br/>

Whether your heirs shall be your own,<br/>

To whose integrity you must,<br/>

In spight of all your caution, trust;<br/>

And, 'less you fly beyond the seas,<br/>

Can fit you with what heirs we please;                        330<br/>

And force you t' own 'em, though begotten<br/>

By French Valets or Irish Footmen.<br/>

Nor can the vigorousest course<br/>

Prevail, unless to make us worse;<br/>

Who still, the harsher we are us'd,                           335<br/>

Are further off from b'ing reduc'd;<br/>

And scorn t' abate, for any ills,<br/>

The least punctilios of our wills.<br/>

Force does but whet our wits t' apply<br/>

Arts, born with us, for remedy;                               340<br/>

Which all your politicks, as yet,<br/>

Have ne'er been able to defeat:<br/>

For when y' have try'd all sorts of ways,<br/>

What fools d' we make of you in plays!<br/>

While all the favours we afford,                              345<br/>

Are but to girt you with the sword,<br/>

To fight our battles in our steads,<br/>

And have your brains beat out o' your heads;<br/>

Encounter, in despite of nature,<br/>

And fight at once, with fire and water,                       350<br/>

With pirates, rocks, and storms, and seas,<br/>

Our pride and vanity t' appease;<br/>

Kill one another, and cut throats,<br/>

For our good graces, and best thoughts;<br/>

To do your exercise for honour,                               355<br/>

And have your brains beat out the sooner;<br/>

Or crack'd, as learnedly, upon<br/>

Things that are never to be known;<br/>

And still appear the more industrious,<br/>

The more your projects are prepost'rous;                      360<br/>

To square the circle of the arts,<br/>

And run stark mad to shew your parts;<br/>

Expound the oracle of laws,<br/>

And turn them which way we see cause<br/>

Be our solicitors and agents,                                 365<br/>

And stand for us in all engagements.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00643">And these are all the mighty pow'rs<br/>

You vainly boast to cry down ours;<br/>

And what in real value's wanting,<br/>

Supply with vapouring and ranting;                            370<br/>

Because yourselves are terrify'd,<br/>

And stoop to one another's pride,<br/>

Believe we have as little wit<br/>

To be out-hector'd, and submit;<br/>

By your example, lose that right                              375<br/>

In treaties which we gain'd in fight;<br/>

And, terrify'd into an awe,<br/>

Pass on ourselves a &lt;o&gt; Salique law:<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00644">Or, as some nations use, give place,<br/>

And truckle to your mighty race;                              380<br/>

Let men usurp th' unjust dominion,<br/>

As if they were the better women.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00645" style="margin-top: 3em">NOTES ON THE LADY's ANSWER TO THE KNIGHT.</p>

<p id="id00646">133 l Whose Arrows learned Poets hold, &amp;c.] The poets feign
Cupid to have two sorts of arrows; the one tipped with gold, and
the other with lead. The golden always inspire and inflame love
in the persons he wounds with them: but, on the contrary, the
leaden create the utmost aversion and hatred. With the first of
these he shot Apollo, and with the other Daphne, according to
Ovid.</p>

<p id="id00647">277 m While, like the mighty Prester John, &amp;c.] Prester John,
an absolute prince, emperor of Abyssinia or Ethiopia. One of
them is reported to have had seventy kings for his vassals, and
so superb and arrogant, that none durst look upon him without
his permission.</p>

<p id="id00648">285 Or Joan de Pucel's braver Name.] Joan of Arc, called also
the Pucelle, or Maid of Orleans. She was born at the town of
Damremi, on the Meuse, daughter of James de Arc, and Isabella
Romee; and was bred, up a shepherdess in the country. At the
age of eighteen or twenty she pretended to an express
commission from God to go to the relief of Orleans, then
besieged by the English, and defended by John Compte de
Dennis, and almost reduced to the last extremity. She went to
the coronation of Charles the Seventh, when he was almost
ruined. She knew that prince in the midst of his nobles; though
meanly habited. The doctors of divinity, and members of
parliament, openly declared that there was some thing
supernatural in her conduct. She sent for a sword, which lay in
the tomb of a knight, which was behind the great altar of the
church of St. Katharine de Forbois, upon the blade of which the
cross and flower-de-luces were engraven, which put the king in
a very great surprise, in regard none besides himself knew of it.
Upon this he sent her with the command of some troops, with
which she relieved Orleans, and drove the English from it,
defeated Talbot at the battle of Pattai, and recovered
Champagne. At last she was unfortunately taken prisoner in a
sally at Champagne in 1430, and tried for a witch or sorceress,
condemned, and burnt in Rouen market-place in May 1430.</p>

<p id="id00649">378 o Pass on ourselves a Salique Law.] The Salique Law is a
law in France, whereby it is enacted, that no female shall inherit
that crown.</p>
