<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Canto III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="canto-2-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
					</h3>
					<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>The Knight, with various Doubts possest,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To win the Lady goes in quest</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of Sidrophel, the Rosy-Crucian,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To know the Dest’nies’ Resolution;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With whom being met, they both chop Logick</span>
							<br/>
							<span>About the Science Astrologick,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Till falling from Dispute to Fight,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The Conj’rer’s worsted by the Knight.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</header>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Doubtless the pleasure is as great</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of being cheated as to cheat;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As lookers-on feel most delight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That least perceive a jugler’s slight;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And still the less they understand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The more th’ admire his slight of hand.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Some with a noise, and greasy light,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are snapt, as men catch larks by night;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ensnar’d and hamper’d by the soul,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As nooses by their legs catch fowl l0</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some with a med’cine, and receipt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are drawn to nibble at the bait;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And tho’ it be a two-foot trout,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis with a single hair pull’d out.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Others believe no voice t’ an organ</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So sweet as lawyer’s in his bar-gown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Until with subtle cobweb-cheats</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’are catch’d in knotted law, like nets;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In which, when once they are imbrangled,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The more they stir, the more they’re tangled;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And while their purses can dispute,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There’s no end of th’ immortal suit.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Others still gape t’ anticipate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The cabinet-designs of fate;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Apply to wizards, to foresee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What shall and what shall never be;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, as those vultures do forebode,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Believe events prove bad or good:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A flam more senseless than the roguery</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of old aruspicy and aug’ry.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That out of garbages of cattle</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Presag’d th’ events of truce or battle;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From flight of birds, or chickens pecking,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Success of great’st attempts would reckon:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though cheats, yet more intelligible</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than those that with the stars do fribble.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This HUDIBRAS by proof found true,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As in due time and place we’ll shew:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For he, with beard and face made clean,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>B’ing mounted on his steed agen,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(And RALPHO got a cock-horse too</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon his beast, with much ado)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Advanc’d on for the Widow’s house,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To acquit himself, and pay his vows;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When various thoughts began to bustle,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with his inward man to justle</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He thought what danger might accrue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If she should find he swore untrue;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or if his squire or he should fail,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And not be punctual in their tale:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It might at once the ruin prove</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both of his honour, faith, and love.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But if he should forbear to go,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She might conclude h’had broke his vow;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that he durst not now for-shame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Appear in court to try his claim.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This was the pen’worth of his thought,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To pass time and uneasy trot.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth he, In all my past adventures</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I ne’er was set so on the tenters;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or taken tardy with dilemma,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That ev’ry way I turn does hem me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with inextricable doubt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Besets my puzzled wits about:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For tho’ the dame has been my bail,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To free me from enchanted jail,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet as a dog, committed close</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For some offence, by chance breaks loose,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And quits his clog, but all in vain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He still draws after him his chain;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So, though my ankle she has quitted,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My heart continues still committed;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And like a bail’d and main-priz’d lover,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Altho’ at large, I am bound over;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when I shall appear in court,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To plead my cause, and answer for’t,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unless the judge do partial prove,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What will become of me and love?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For if in our account we vary,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or but in circumstance miscarry;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or if she put me to strict proof,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And make me pull my doublet off,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To shew, by evident record</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Writ on my skin, I’ve kept my Word;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How can I e’er expect to have her,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Having demurr’d onto her favour?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But faith, and love, and honour lost,.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall be reduc’d t’ a Knight o’ th’ Post.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beside, that stripping may prevent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What I’m to prove by argument,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And justify I have a tail</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that way, too, my proof may fail.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Oh that I cou’d enucleate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And solve the problems of my fate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or find, by necromantick art,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How far the dest’nies take my part</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For if I were not more than certain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To win and wear her, and her fortune,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’d go no farther in his courtship,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To hazard soul, estate, and worship</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For though an oath obliges not</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where any thing is to be got,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(As thou last prov’d) yet ’tis profane,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And sinful, when men swear in vain.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth RALPH, Not far from hence doth dwell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A cunning man, hight SIDROPHEL,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That deals in destiny’s dark counsels,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And sage opinions of the Moon sells;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To whom all people, far and near,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On deep importances repair;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When brass and pewter hap to stray,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And linen slinks out of the way;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When geese and pullen are seduc’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And sows of sucking-pigs are chows’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When cattle feel indisposition,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And need th’ opinion of physician;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When murrain reigns in hogs or sheep.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And chickens languish of the pip;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When yeast and outward means do fail,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And have no pow’r to work on ale:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When butter does refuse to come,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And love proves cross and humoursome:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To him with questions, and with urine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They for discov’ry flock, or curing.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth HUDIBRAS, This SIDROPHEL</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’ve heard of, and should like it well,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If thou canst prove the Saints have freedom</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To go to Sorc’rers when they need ’em.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Says RALPHO, There’s no doubt of that</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose principles I quoted late,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prove that the Godly may alledge</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For any thing their Privilege;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to the Dev’l himself may go,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If they have motives thereunto.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For, as there is a war between</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Dev’l and them, it is no sin,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If they by subtle stratagem</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Make use of him, as he does them.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Has not this present Parliament</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A Ledger to the Devil sent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-106" id="noteref-106" epub:type="noteref">106</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fully impowr’d to treat about</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Finding revolted witches out</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And has not he, within a year,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hang’d threescore of ’em in one shire?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some only for not being drown’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And some for sitting above ground,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whole days and nights, upon their breeches,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And feeling pain, were hang’d for witches.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And some for putting knavish tricks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon green geese and turky-chicks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And pigs, that suddenly deceast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of griefs unnat’ral, as he guest;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who after prov’d himself a witch</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And made a rod for his own breech.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did not the Devil appear to MARTIN</span>
						<br/>
						<span>LUTHER in Germany for certain;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And wou’d have gull’d him with a trick,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But Martin was too politick?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did he not help the Dutch to purge<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-107" id="noteref-107" epub:type="noteref">107</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>At ANTWERP their Cathedral Church?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sing catches to the Saints at MASCON,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-108" id="noteref-108" epub:type="noteref">108</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And tell them all they came to ask him</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Appear’d in divers shapes to KELLY,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-109" id="noteref-109" epub:type="noteref">109</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And speak i’ th’ Nun of LOUDON’s belly?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Meet with the Parliament’s Committee<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-110" id="noteref-110" epub:type="noteref">110</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>At WOODSTOCK on a pers’nal treaty?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At SARUM take a cavalier<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-111" id="noteref-111" epub:type="noteref">111</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’ th’ Cause’s service prisoner</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As WITHERS, in immortal rhime,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Has register’d to after-time!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do not nor great Reformers use</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This SIDROPHEL to forebode news?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To write of victories next year,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And castles taken yet i’ th’ air</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of battles fought at sea, and ships</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sank two years hence, the last eclipse?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A total overthrow giv’n the King</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Cornwall, horse and foot, next Spring!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And has not he point-blank foretold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whats’e’er the Close Committee would?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made Mars and Saturn for the Cause</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The moon for Fundamental Laws?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Ram, the Bull, and Goat declare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against the Book of Common-Pray’r?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Scorpion take the Protestation,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Bear engage for Reformation?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made all the Royal Stars recant,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Compound and take the Covenant?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth HUDIBRAS, The case is clear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Saints may ‘mploy a Conjurer,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As thou hast prov’d it by their practice;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No argument like matter of fact is;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And we are best of all led to</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Men’s principles by what they do.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then let us straight advance in quest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of this profound Gymnosophist</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as the Fates and he advise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pursue or wave this enterprise,</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This said, he turn’d about his steed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And eftsoons on th’ adventure rid;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where leave we him and RALPH a while,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to the Conjurer turn our stile,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To let our reader understand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What’s useful of him before-hand.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He had been long t’wards mathematicks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Optics, philosophy, and staticks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Magick, horoscopy, astrology,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And was old dog at physiology</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But as a dog that turns the spit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bestirs himself, and plies his feet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To climb the wheel, but all in vain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His own weight brings him down again,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And still he’s in the self-same place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where at his setting out h was</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So in the circle of the arts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did he advance his nat’ral parts,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till falling back still, for retreat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He fell to juggle, cant, and cheat:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For as those fowls that live in water</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are never wet, he did but smatter:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whate’er he labour’d to appear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His understanding still was clear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet none a deeper knowledge boasted,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Since old HODGE-BACON and BOB GROSTED.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-112" id="noteref-112" epub:type="noteref">112</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ Intelligible World he knew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all men dream on’t to be true;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That in this world there’s not a wart</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That has not there a counterpart;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor can there on the face of ground</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An individual beard be found,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That has not, in that foreign nation,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A fellow of the self-same fashion</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So cut, so colour’d, and so curl’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As those are in th’ Inferior World.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>H’ had read DEE’s Prefaces before,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The DEV’L, and EUCLID, o’er and o’er;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all the intrigues ’twixt him and KELLY,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>LESCUS and th’ EMPEROR, wou’d tell ye;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But with the Moon was more familiar</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than e’er was almanack well-willer;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her secrets understood so clear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That some believ’d he had been there;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Knew when she was in the fittest mood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For cutting corns, or letting blood;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When for anointing scabs or itches,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or to the bum applying leeches;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When sows and bitches may be spay’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in what sign best cyder’s made:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether the wane be, or increase,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Best to set garlick, or sow pease:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who first found out the Man i’ th’ Moon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That to the ancients was unknown;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How many dukes, and earls, and peers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are in the planetary spheres;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their airy empire and command,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their sev’ral strengths by sea and land;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What factions th’ have, and what they drive at</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In public vogue, or what in private;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With what designs and interests</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Each party manages contests.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He made an instrument to know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If the Moon shine at full or no;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That wou’d as soon as e’er she shone, straight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether ’twere day or night demonstrate;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tell what her d’meter t’ an inch is,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And prove that she’s not made of green cheese.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It wou’d demonstrate, that the Man in</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Moon’s a Sea Mediterranean;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that it is no dog nor bitch,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That stands behind him at his breech,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But a huge Caspian Sea, or lake,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With arms, which men for legs mistake;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How large a gulph his tail composes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And what a goodly bay his nose is;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How many German leagues by th’ scale</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cape Snout’s from Promontory Tail.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He made a planetary gin,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which rats would run their own heads in,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And cause on purpose to be taken,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Without th’ expence of cheese or bacon.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With lute-strings he would counterfeit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Maggots that crawl on dish of meat:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quote moles and spots on any place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O’ th’ body, by the index face:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Detect lost maiden-heads by sneezing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or breaking wind of dames, or pissing;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cure warts and corns with application</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of med’cines to th’ imagination;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fright agues into dogs, and scare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With rhimes the tooth-ach and catarrh;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Chace evil spirits away by dint</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of cickle, horse-shoe, hollow-flint;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spit fire out of a walnut-shell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which made the Roman slaves rebel;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And fire a mine in China here</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With sympathetic gunpowder.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He knew whats’ever’s to be known,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But much more than he knew would own;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What med’cine ’twas that PARACELSUS</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Could make a man with, as he tells us;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What figur’d slates are best to make</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On watry surface duck or drake;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What bowling-stones, in running race</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon a board, have swiftest pace;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether a pulse beat in the black</span>
						<br/>
						<span>List of a dappled louse’s back;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If systole or diastole move</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quickest when he’s in wrath or love</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When two of them do run a race,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether they gallop, trot, or pace:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How many scores a flea will jump,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of his own length, from head to rump;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which SOCRATES and CHAEREPHON,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-113" id="noteref-113" epub:type="noteref">113</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>In vain, assay’d so long agon;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether his snout a perfect nose is,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And not an elephant’s proboscis</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How many diff’rent specieses</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of maggots breed in rotten cheese</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And which are next of kin to those</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Engender’d in a chandler’s nose;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or those not seen, but understood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That live in vinegar and wood.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>A paultry wretch he had, half-starv’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That him in place of Zany serv’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hight WHACHUM, bred to dash and draw,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not wine, but more unwholesome law</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make ’twixt words and lines huge gaps,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wide as meridians in maps;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To squander paper, and spare ink,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And cheat men of their words, some think.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From this, by merited degrees,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He’d to more high advancement rise;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be an under-conjurer,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A journeyman astrologer.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His business was to pump and wheedle,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And men with their own keys unriddle;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And make them to themselves give answers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For which they pay the necromancers;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To fetch and carry intelligence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of whom, and what, and where, and whence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all discoveries disperse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Among th’ whole pack of conjurers</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What cut-purses have left with them</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For the right owners to redeem;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And what they dare not vent find out,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To gain themselves and th’ art repute;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Draw figures, schemes, and horoscopes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Newgate, Bridewell, brokers’ shops,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of thieves ascendant in the cart;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And find out all by rules of art;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which way a serving-man, that’s run</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With cloaths or money away, is gone:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who pick’d a fob at holding forth;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And where a watch, for half the worth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>May be redeem’d; or stolen plate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Restor’d at conscionable rate.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beside all this, he serv’d his master</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In quality of poetaster;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And rhimes appropriate could make</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To ev’ry month i’ th almanack</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What terms begin and end could tell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With their returns, in doggerel;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When the exchequer opes and shuts,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And sowgelder with safety cuts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When men may eat and drink their fill,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when be temp’rate, if they will;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When use and when abstain from vice,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Figs, grapes, phlebotomy, and spice.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as in prison mean rogues beat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hemp for the service of the great,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So WHACHUM beats his dirty brains,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>T’ advance his master’s fame and gains</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, like the Devil’s oracles,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Put into doggrel rhimes his spells,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which, over ev’ry month’s blank page</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’ th’ almanack, strange bilks presage.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He would an elegy compose</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On maggots squeez’d out of his nose;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In lyrick numbers write an ode on</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His mistress, eating a black-pudden:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when imprison’d air escap’d her,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It puft him with poetic rapture.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His sonnets charm’d th’ attentive crowd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By wide-mouth’d mortal troll’d aloud,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That ‘circl’d with his long-ear’d guests,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like ORPHEUS look’d among the beasts.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A carman’s horse could not pass by,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But stood ty’d up to poetry:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No porter’s burthen pass’d along,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But serv’d for burthen to his song:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Each window like a pill’ry appears,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With heads thrust through, nail’d by the ears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All trades run in as to the sight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of monsters, or their dear delight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The gallow tree, when cutting purse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Breeds bus’ness for heroic verse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which none does hear, but would have hung</span>
						<br/>
						<span>T’ have been the theme of such a song.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Those two together long had liv’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In mansion prudently contriv’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where neither tree nor house could bar</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The free detection of a star</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And nigh an ancient obelisk</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was rais’d by him, found out by FISK,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-114" id="noteref-114" epub:type="noteref">114</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>On which was a written not in words,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But hieroglyphic mute of birds,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Many rare pithy saws concerning</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The worth of astrologic learning.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From top of this there hung a rope,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To a which he fasten’d telescope;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The spectacles with which the stars</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He reads in smallest characters.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It happen’d as a boy, one night,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did fly his tarsel of a kite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The strangest long-wing’d hawk that flies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That, like a bird of Paradise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or herald’s martlet, has no legs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor hatches young ones, nor lays eggs;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His train was six yards long, milk-white,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At th’ end of which there hung a light,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Inclos’d in lanthorn, made of paper,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That far off like a star did appear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This SIDROPHEL by chance espy’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with amazement staring wide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bless us! quoth he, what dreadful wonder</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is that appears in heaven yonder?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A comet, and without a beard!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or star that ne’er before appear’d!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’m certain ’tis not in the scrowl</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all those beasts, and fish, and fowl,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With which, like Indian plantations,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The learned stock the constellations</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor those that draw for signs have bin</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To th’ houses where the planets inn.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It must be supernatural,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unless it be that cannon-ball<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-115" id="noteref-115" epub:type="noteref">115</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>That, shot i’ th’ air point-blank upright,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was borne to that prodigious height,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That learn’d Philosophers maintain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It ne’er came backwards down again;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But in the airy region yet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hangs like the body of MAHOMET</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For if it be above the shade</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That by the earth’s round bulk is made,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis probable it may from far</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Appear no bullet, but a star.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This said, he to his engine flew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Plac’d near at hand, in open view,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And rais’d it ‘till it levell’d right</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against the glow-worm tail of kite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then peeping thro’, Bless us! (quoth he)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It is a planet, now I see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, if I err not, by his proper</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Figure, that’s like tobacco-stopper,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It should be Saturn. Yes, ’tis clear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis Saturn; but what makes him there?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He’s got between the Dragon’s Tail</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And farther Leg behind o’ th’ Whale.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pray heav’n divert the fatal omen,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For ’tis a prodigy not common;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And can no less than the world’s end,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or Nature’s funeral, portend.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>With that he fell again to pry.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thro’ perspective more wistfully,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When by mischance the fatal string,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That kept the tow’ring fowl on wing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Breaking, down fell the star. Well shot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quoth WHACHUM, who right wisely thought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>H’ had levell’d at a star, and hit it</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But SIDROPHEL, more subtle-witted,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cry’d out, What horrible and fearful</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Portent is this, to see a star fall?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It threatens nature, and the doom</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will not be long before it come</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When stars do fail, ’tis plain enough,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The day of judgment’s not far off;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As lately ’twas reveal’d to SEDGWICK,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-116" id="noteref-116" epub:type="noteref">116</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And some of us find out by magick.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then since the time we have to live</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In this world’s shorten’d, let us strive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make our best advantage of it,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And pay our losses with our profit.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This feat fell out not long before</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Knight, upon the forenam’d score,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In quest of SIDROPHEL advancing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was now in prospect of the mansion</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom he discov’ring, turn’d his glass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And found far off, ’twas HUDIBRAS.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>WHACHUM, (quoth he), look yonder, some</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To try or use our art are come</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The one’s the learned Knight: seek out,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And pump ’em what they come about.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>WHACHUM advanc’d, with all submissness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>T’ accost em, but much more their bus’ness.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He held a stirrup, while the Knight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From leathern bare-bones did alight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And taking from his hand the bridle,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Approach’d the dark Squire to unriddle.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He gave him first the time o’ th’ day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And welcom’d him, as he might say:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He ask’d him whence he came, and whither</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their bus’ness lay? Quoth RALPHO, Hither.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did you not lose? Quoth RALPHO, Nay.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quoth WHACHUM, Sir, I meant your way!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your Knight⁠—Quoth RALPHO, Is a lover,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And pains intolerable doth suffer:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For lovers’ hearts are not their own hearts,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor lights, nor lungs, and so forth downwards.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What time, (quoth RALPHO), Sir?⁠—Too long</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Three years it off and on has hung. —</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quoth he, I meant what time o’the day ’tis. —</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quoth RALPHO, Between seven and eight ’tis.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why then, (quoth Whachum) my small art</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tells me, the dame has a hard heart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or great estate. — Quoth RALPH, A jointer,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which makes him have so hot a mind t’her.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mean while the Knight was making water,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before he fell upon the matter;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which having done, the Wizard steps in,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To give him suitable reception</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But kept his bus’ness at a bay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till WHACHUM put him in the way;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who having now, by RALPHO’s light.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Expounded th’ errand of the Knight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And what he came to know, drew near,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To whisper in the Conj’rer’s ear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which he prevented thus: What was’t,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quoth he, that I was saying last,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before these gentlemen arriv’d?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quoth WHACHUM, Venus you retriev’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In opposition with Mars,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And no benigne friendly stars</span>
						<br/>
						<span>T’ allay the effect. — Quoth Wizard, So</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Virgo? Ha!⁠—Quoth WHACHUM, No.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Has Saturn nothing to do in it?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One-tenth of’s circle to a minute.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis well, quoth he. — Sir, you’ll excuse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This rudeness I am forc’d to use</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It is a scheme and face of Heaven,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As the aspects are dispos’d this even,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I was contemplating upon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When you arriv’d; but now I’ve done,</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth HUDIBRAS, If I appear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unseasonable in coming here</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At such a tone, to interrupt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your speculations, which I hop’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Assistance from, and come to use,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>‘T is fit that I ask your excuse.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By no means, Sir, quoth SIDROPHEL;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The stars your coming did foretel:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I did expect you here, and knew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before you spake, your bus’ness too.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth HUDIBRAS, Make that appear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I shall credit whatsoe’er</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You tell me after on your word,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Howe’er unlikely, or absurd.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>You are in love, Sir, with a widow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quoth he, that does not greatly heed you,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And for three years has rid your wit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And passion without drawing bit:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And now your bus’ness is to know,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If you shall carry her or no.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth HUDIBRAS, You’re in the right;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But how the Devil you came by’t</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I can’t imagine; for the Stars,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’m sure, can tell no more than a horse;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor can their aspects (though you pore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your eyes out on ’em) tell you more</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than th’ oracle of sieve and sheers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That turns as certain as the spheres:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But if the Devil’s of your counsel,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Much may be done my noble Donzel;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And ’tis on his account I come,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To know from you my fatal doom.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth SIDROPHEL, If you Suppose,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sir Knight, that I am one of those,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I might suspect, and take the alarm,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your bus’ness is but to inform;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But if it be, ’tis ne’er the near;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You have a wrong sow by the ear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For I assure you, for my part,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I only deal by rules of art,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such as are lawful, and judge by</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Conclusions of Astrology:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But for the Dev’l, know nothing by him;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But only this, that I defy him.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth he, Whatever others deem ye,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I understand your metonymy:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your words of second-hand intention,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When things by wrongful names you mention;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The mystick sense of all your terms,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That are, indeed, but magick charms</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To raise the Devil, and mean one thing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that is down-right conjuring;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in itself more warrantable,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than cheat, or canting to a rabble,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or putting tricks upon the Moon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which by confed’racy are done.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your ancient conjurers were wont</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make her from her sphere dismount.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to their incantations stoop:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They scorn’d to pore thro’ telescope,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or idly play at bo-peep with her,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To find out cloudy or fair weather,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which ev’ry almanack can tell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Perhaps, as learnedly and well,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As you yourself⁠—Then, friend, I doubt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You go the furthest way about.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your modern Indian magician<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-117" id="noteref-117" epub:type="noteref">117</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Makes but a hole in th’ earth to piss in,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And straight resolves all questions by’t,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And seldom fails to be i’th’ right.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Rosy-Crucian way’s more sure</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To bring the Devil to the lure;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Each of ’em has a sev’ral gin</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To catch intelligences in.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some by the nose with fumes trepan ’em,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As DUNSTAN did the Devil’s grannam;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Others, with characters and words,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Catch ’em, as men in nets do birds;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And some with symbols, signs, and tricks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Engrav’d with planetary nicks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With their own influences will fetch ’em</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Down from their orbs, arrest, and catch ’em;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Make ’em depose and answer to</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All questions e’re they let them go.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>BUMBASTUS kept a Devil’s bird<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-118" id="noteref-118" epub:type="noteref">118</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shut in the pummel of his sword,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That taught him all the cunning pranks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of past and future mountebanks.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>KELLY did all his feats upon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Devil’s looking-glass, a stone;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where playing with him at bo-peep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He solv’d all problems ne’er so deep.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>AGRIPPA kept a Stygian pug,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-119" id="noteref-119" epub:type="noteref">119</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’ th’ garb and habit of a dog,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That was his tutor, and the cur</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Read to th’ occult philosopher,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And taught him subt’ly to maintain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All other sciences are vain.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To this, quoth SIDROPHELLO, Sir,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>AGRIPPA was no conjurer,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor PARACELSUS, no, nor BEHMEN;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor was the dog a Cacodaemon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But a true dog, that would shew tricks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For th’ emperor, and leap o’er sticks;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would fetch and carry; was more civil</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than other dogs, but yet no Devil;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And whatsoe’er he’s said to do,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He went the self-same way we go.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As for the Rosy-Cross Philosophers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom you will have to be but sorcerers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What they pretend to is no more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than TRISMEGISTUS did before,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>PYTHAGORAS, old ZOROASTER,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And APOLLONIUS their master;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To whom they do confess they owe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All that they do, and all they know.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth HUDIBRAS, Alas! what is’t t’ us,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether ’twas said by TRISMEGISTUS,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If it be nonsense, false, or mystick,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or not intelligible, or sophistick?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis not antiquity, nor author,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That makes Truth Truth, altho’ Times daughter;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Twas he that put her in the pit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before he pull’d her out of it;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as he eats his sons, just so</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He feeds upon his daughters too.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor does it follow, ‘cause a herald,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can make a gentleman, scarce a year old,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be descended of a race</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of ancient kings in a small space,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That we should all opinions hold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Authentic that we can make old.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth SIDROPHEL, It is no part</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of prudence to cry down an art,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And what it may perform deny,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because you understand not why</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(As AVERHOIS play’d but a mean trick<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-120" id="noteref-120" epub:type="noteref">120</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>To damn our whole art for eccentrick:)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For Who knows all that knowledge contains</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Men dwell not on the tops of mountains,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But on their sides, or rising’s seat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So ’tis with knowledge’s vast height.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do not the hist’ries of all ages</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Relate miraculous presages,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of strange turns in the world’s affairs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Foreseen b’ Astrologers, Soothsayers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Chaldeans, learn’d Genethliacks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And some that have writ almanacks?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The MEDIAN emp’ror dreamt his daughter<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-121" id="noteref-121" epub:type="noteref">121</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had pist all ASIA under water,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that a vine, sprung from her haunches,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O’erspread his empire with its branches:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And did not soothsayers expound it,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As after by th’ event he found it?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When CAESAR in the senate fell,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-122" id="noteref-122" epub:type="noteref">122</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did not the sun eclips’d foretel,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, in resentment of his slaughter,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Look’d pale for almost a year after?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>AUGUSTUS having, b’ oversight,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-123" id="noteref-123" epub:type="noteref">123</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Put on his left shoe ‘fore his right,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had like to have been slain that day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By soldiers mutin’ing for pay.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are there not myriads of this sort,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which stories of all times report?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is it not ominous in all countries</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When crows and ravens croak upon trees?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Roman senate, when within<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-124" id="noteref-124" epub:type="noteref">124</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>The city walls an owl was seen</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did cause their clergy, with lustrations,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(Our Synod calls humiliations),</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The round-fac’d prodigy t’avert</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From doing town or country hurt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And if an owl have so much pow’r,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why should not planets have much more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That in a region far above</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Inferior fowls of the air move,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And should see further, and foreknow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More than their augury below?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though that once serv’d the polity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of mighty states to govern by</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And this is what we take in hand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By pow’rful art to understand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which, how we have perform’d, all ages</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can speak th’ events of our presages</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have we not lately, in the Moon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Found a New World, to the Old unknown?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Discover’d sea and land, COLUMBUS</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And MAGELLAN cou’d never compass?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made mountains with our tubes appear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And cattle grazing on ’em there?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth HUDIBRAS, You lie so ope,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I, without a telescope,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can mind your tricks out, and descry</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where you tell truth, and where you lye:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For ANAXAGORAS, long agon,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-125" id="noteref-125" epub:type="noteref">125</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Saw hills, as well as you, i’ th’ Moon;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And held the Sun was but a piece</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of red-hot ir’n, as big as Greece;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Believ’d the Heav’ns were made of stone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because the Sun had voided one;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, rather than he would recant</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ opinion, suffer’d banishment.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But what, alas! is it to us,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether i’ th’ Moon men thus or thus</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do eat their Porridge, cut their corns,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or whether they have tails or horns?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What trade from thence can you advance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But what we nearer have from France?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What can our travellers bring home,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That is not to be learnt at Rome?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What politicks, or strange opinions,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That are not in our own dominions?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What science can he brought from thence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In which we do not here commence?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What revelations, or religions,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That are not in our native regions?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are sweating lanthorns, or screen-fans,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made better there than th’ are in France?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or do they teach to sing and play</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O’ th’ gittar there a newer way?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can they make plays there, that shall fit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The public humour, with less wit?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Write wittier dances, quainter shows,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or fight with more ingenious blows?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or does the man i’ th’ moon look big,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And wear a huger perriwig,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shew in his gait or face more tricks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than our own native lunaticks?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And if w’ out-do him here at home,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What good of your design can come?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As wind i’ th’ hypocondries pent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is but a blast if downward sent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But if it upward chance to fly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Becomes new Light and Prophecy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So when your speculations tend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Above their just and useful end,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Although they promise strange and great</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Discoveries of things far set,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They are but idle dreams and fancies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And savour strongly of the ganzas.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tell me but what’s the natural cause,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why on a sign no painter draws</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The full moon ever, but the half;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Resolve that with your JACOB’s staff;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or why wolves raise a hubbub at her,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And dogs howl when she shines in water;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I shall freely give my vote,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You may know something more remote.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>At this deep SIDROPHEL look’d wise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And staring round with owl-like eyes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He put his face into a posture</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of sapience, and began to bluster:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For having three times shook his head</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To stir his wit up, thus he said</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Art has no mortal enemies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Next ignorance, but owls and geese;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those consecrated geese in orders,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That to the Capitol were warders;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And being then upon patrol,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With noise alone beat off the Gaul:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or those Athenian Sceptic owls,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That will not credit their own souls;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or any science understand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beyond the reach of eye or hand;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But meas’ring all things by their own</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Knowledge, hold nothing’s to be known</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those wholesale criticks, that in coffee-</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Houses cry down all philosophy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And will not know upon what ground</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In nature we our doctrine found,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Altho’ with pregnant evidence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We can demonstrate it to sense,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As I just now have done to you,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Foretelling what you came to know.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were the stars only made to light</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Robbers and burglarers by night?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To wait on drunkards, thieves, gold-finders,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And lovers solacing behind doors,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or giving one another pledges</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of matrimony under hedges?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or witches simpling, and on gibbets</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cutting from malefactors snippets?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or from the pillory tips of ears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Rebel-Saints and perjurers?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Only to stand by, and look on,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But not know what is said or done?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is there a constellation there,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That was not born and bred up here?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And therefore cannot be to learn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In any inferior concern.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were they not, during all their lives,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Most of ’em pirates, whores and thieves;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And is it like they have not still</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In their old practices some skill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is there a planet that by birth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Does not derive its house from earth?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And therefore probably must know,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What is and hath been done below.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who made the Balance, or whence came</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Bull, the Lion, and the Ram?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did not we here the Argo rig,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Make BERENICE’s periwig?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose liv’ry does the Coachman wear?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or who made Cassiopeia’s chair?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And therefore, as they came from hence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With us may hold intelligence.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>PLATO deny’d the world can be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Govern’d without geometree,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(For money b’ing the common scale</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of things by measure, weight, and tale,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In all th’ affairs of Church and State,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis both the balance and the weight;)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then much less can it be without</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Divine Astrology made out;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That puts the other down in worth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As far as Heav’n’s above the earth.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>These reasons (quoth the Knight) I grant</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are something more significant</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than any that the learned use</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon this subject to produce;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yet th’ are far from satisfactory,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>T’ establish and keep up your factory.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ Egyptians say, the Sun has twice</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shifted his setting and his rise<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-126" id="noteref-126" epub:type="noteref">126</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Twice has he risen in the west,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As many times set in the east;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But whether that be true or no,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Dev’l any of you know.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some hold the heavens like a top,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-127" id="noteref-127" epub:type="noteref">127</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And kept by circulation. up;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, were’t not for their wheeling round,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They’d instantly fall to the ground:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As sage EMPEDOCLES of old,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And from him modern authors hold.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>PLATO believ’d the Sun and Moon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Below all other Planets run.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-128" id="noteref-128" epub:type="noteref">128</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some MERCURY, some VENUS, seat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Above the Sun himself in height.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The learned SCALIGER complain’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gainst what COPERNICUS maintain’d,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-129" id="noteref-129" epub:type="noteref">129</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>That, in twelve hundred years and odd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Sun had left its ancient road,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And nearer to time earth is come</span>
						<br/>
						<span>‘Bove fifty thousand miles from home:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Swore ’twas a most notorious flam;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And he that had so little shame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To vent such fopperies abroad,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deserv’d to have his rump well claw’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which Monsieur BODIN hearing, swore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That he deserv’d the rod much more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That durst upon a truth give doom;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He knew less than the Pope of Rome.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>CARDAN believ’d great states depend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon the tip o’ th’ Bear’s tail’s end;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-130" id="noteref-130" epub:type="noteref">130</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>That, as she whisk’d it t’wards the Sun,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Strow’d mighty empires up and down;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which others say must needs be false,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because your true bears have no tails.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some say the Zodiack Constellations</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have long since chang’d their antique stations</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Above a sign, and prove the same</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Taurus now once in the Ram;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Affirm the trigons chop’d and chang’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The wat’ry with the fiery rang’d:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then how can their effects still hold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be the same they were of old?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This, though the art were true, would make</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our modern soothsayers mistake:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in one cause they tell more lies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In figures and nativities,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than th’ old Chaldean conjurers</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In so many hundred thousand years<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-131" id="noteref-131" epub:type="noteref">131</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beside their nonsense in translating,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For want of accidence and Latin,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like Idus, and Calendae, Englisht</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The quarter-days by skilful linguist;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yet with canting, sleight and, cheat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Twill serve their turn to do the feat;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Make fools believe in their foreseeing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of things before they are in being</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To swallow gudgeons ere th’ are catch’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And count their chickens ere th’ are hatch’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Make them the constellations prompt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And give ’em back their own accompt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But still the best to him that gives</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The best price for’t, or best believes.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some towns and cities, some, for brevity,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have cast the ’versal world’s nativity,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And made the infant-stars confess,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like fools or children, what they please.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some calculate the hidden fates</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of monkeys, puppy-dogs, and cats</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some running-nags and fighting cocks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some love, trade, law-suits, and the pox;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some take a measure of the lives</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of fathers, mothers, husbands, wives;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Make opposition, trine, and quartile,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tell who is barren, and who fertile;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if the planet’s first aspect</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The tender infant did infect</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In soul and body, and instill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All future good, and future ill;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which, in their dark fatalities lurking,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At destin’d periods fall a working;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And break out, like the hidden seeds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of long diseases, into deeds,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In friendships, enmities, and strife,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all the emergencies of life.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No sooner does he peep into</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The world, but he has done his do;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Catch’d all diseases, took all physick</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That cures or kills a man that is sick;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Marry’d his punctual dose of wives;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is cuckolded, and breaks or thrives.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There’s but the twinkling of a star</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Between a man of peace and war;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A thief and justice, fool and knave,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A huffing officer and a slave;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A crafty lawyer and a pick-pocket,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A great philosopher and a blockhead;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A formal preacher and a player,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A learn’d physician and manslayer.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if men from the stars did suck</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Old age, diseases, and ill-luck,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wit, folly, honour, virtue, vice,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Trade, travel, women, claps, and dice;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And draw, with the first air they breathe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Battle and murder, sudden death.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are not these fine commodities</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be imported from the skies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And vended here amongst the rabble,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For staple goods and warrantable?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like money by the Druids borrow’d,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-132" id="noteref-132" epub:type="noteref">132</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>In th’ other world to be restor’d?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth SIDROPHEL, To let you know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You wrong the art, and artists too,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Since arguments are lost on those</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That do our principles oppose,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I will (although I’ve done’t before)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Demonstrate to your sense once more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And draw a figure, that shall tell you</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What you, perhaps, forget befel you,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By way of horary inspection,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which some account our worst erection.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With that he circles draws, and squares,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With cyphers, astral characters;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then looks ’em o’er, to und’erstand ’em,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Although set down hob-nab, at random.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quoth he, This scheme of th’ heavens set,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Discovers how in fight you met</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At Kingston with a may-pole idol,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that y’ were bang’d both back and side well;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And though you overcame the bear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The dogs beat you at Brentford fair;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where sturdy butchers broke your noddle,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And handled you like a fop-doodle.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth HUDIBRAS, I now perceive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You are no conj’rer, by your leave;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That paultry story is untrue,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-133" id="noteref-133" epub:type="noteref">133</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And forg’d to cheat such gulls as you.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Not true? quoth he; howe’er you vapour,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I can what I affirm make appear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>WHACHUM shall justify’t t’ your face,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And prove he was upon the place.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He play’d the Saltinbancho’s part,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Transform’d t’ a Frenchman by my art</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He stole your cloak, and pick’d your pocket,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Chows’d and caldes’d ye like a blockhead:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And what you lost I can produce,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If you deny it, here i’ th’ house.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth HUDIBRAS, I do believe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That argument’s demonstrative.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>RALPHO, bear witness; and go fetch us</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A constable to seize the wretches</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For though th’ are both false knaves and cheats,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Impostors, jugglers, counterfeits,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’ll make them serve for perpendiculars</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As true as e’er were us’d by bricklayers.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They’re guilty, by their own confessions,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of felony, and at the sessions,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon the bench, I will so handle ’em,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That the vibration of this pendulum<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-134" id="noteref-134" epub:type="noteref">134</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shalt make all taylors yards of one</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unanimous opinion,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A thing he long has vapour’d of,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But now shall wake it out of proof.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth SIDROPHEL, I do not doubt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To find friends that will bear me out,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor have I hazarded my art,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And neck, so long on the state’s part,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be expos’d i’ th’ end to suffer</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By such a braggadocio huffer.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Huffer! quoth HUDIBRAS: this sword</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall down thy false throat craw that word.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>RALPHO, make haste, and call an officer,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To apprehend this Stygian sophister,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Meanwhile I’ll hold ’em at a bay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lest he and WHACHUM run away.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But SIDROPHEL who, from the aspect</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of HUDIBRAS did now erect</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A figure worse portenting far</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than that of a malignant star,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Believ’d it now the fittest moment</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To shun the danger that might come on’t,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While HUDIBRAS was all alone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And he and WHACHUM, two to one.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This being resolv’d, he spy’d, by chance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Behind the door, an iron lance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That many a sturdy limb had gor’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And legs, and loins, and shoulders bor’d:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He snatch’d it up, and made a pass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make his way through HUDIBRAS.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>WHACHUM had got a fire-fork,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With which he vow’d to do his work.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But HUDIBRAS was well prepar’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And stoutly stood upon his guard:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He put by SIDROPHELLO’S thrust,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in right manfully he rusht;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The weapon from his gripe he wrung,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And laid him on the earth along.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>WHACHUM his sea-coal prong threw by,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And basely turn’d his back to fly</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But HUDIBRAS gave him a twitch</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As quick as light’ning in the breech,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Just in the place where honour’s lodg’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As wise philosophers have judg’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because a kick in that place more</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hurts honour than deep wounds before.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth HUDIBRAS, The stars determine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You are my prisoners, base vermine!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Could they not tell you so as well</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As what I came to know foretell?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By this what cheats you are we find,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That in your own concerns are blind.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your lives are now at my dispose,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be redeem’d by fine or blows:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But who his honour wou’d defile,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To take or sell two lives so vile?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’ll give you quarter; but your pillage,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The conq’ring warrior’s crop and tillage,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which with his sword he reaps and plows,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That’s mine, the law of arms allows.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This said, in haste, in haste he fell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To rummaging of SIDROPHEL.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>First, he expounded both his pockets,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And found a watch, with rings and lockets,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which had been left with him t’ erect</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A figure for, and so detect;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A copper-plate, with almanacks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Engrav’d upon’t; with other knacks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of BOOKER’s LILLY’s, SARAH JIMMERS’,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And blank-schemes to discover nimmers;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A moon-dial, with Napier’s bones,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And sev’ral constellation stones,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Engrav’d in planetary hours,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That over mortals had strange powers</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make ’em thrive in law or trade,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And stab or poison to evade;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In wit or wisdom to improve,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And be victorious in love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>WHACHUM had neither cross nor pile;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His plunder was not worth the while;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All which the conq’rer did discompt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To pay for curing of his rump.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But SIDROPHEL, as full of tricks</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As Rota-men of politicks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Straight cast about to over-reach</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ unwary conqu’ror with a fetch,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And make him clad (at least) to quit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His victory, and fly the pit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before the Secular Prince of Darkness<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-135" id="noteref-135" epub:type="noteref">135</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Arriv’d to seize upon his carcass?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as a fox, with hot pursuit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Chac’d thro’ a warren, casts about</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To save his credit, and among</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dead vermin on a gallows hung,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And while the dogs run underneath,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Escap’d (by counterfeiting death)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not out of cunning, but a train</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of atoms justling in his brain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As learn’d philosophers give out,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So SIDROPHELLO cast about,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And fell to’s wonted trade again,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To feign himself in earnest slain:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>First stretch’d out one leg, than another,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And seeming in his breath to smother</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A broken sigh; quoth he, Where am I,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Alive or dead? or which way came I,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through so immense a space so soon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But now I thought myself in th’ Moon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that a monster with huge whiskers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More formidable than a Switzer’s,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My body through and through had drill’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And WHACHUM by my side had kill’d:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had cross-examin’d both our hose,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And plunder’d all we had to lose.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Look, there he is; I see him now,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And feel the place I am run through:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And there lies WHACHUM by my side</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stone dead, and in his own blood dy’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Oh! Oh! with that he fetch’d a groan,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And fell again into a swoon;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shut both his eyes, and stopp’d his breath,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to the life out-acted death;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That HUDIBRAS, to all appearing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Believ’d him to be dead as herring.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He held it now no longer safe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To tarry the return of RALPH,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But rather leave him in the lurch:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thought he, he has abus’d our Church,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Refus’d to give himself one firk</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To carry on the publick work;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Despis’d our Synod-men like dirt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And made their discipline his sport;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Divulg’d the secrets of their classes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And their conventions prov’d high places;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Disparag’d their tythe-pigs as Pagan,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And set at nought their cheese and bacon;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rail’d at their Covenant, and jeer’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their rev’rend parsons to my beard:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For all which scandals, to be quit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At once, this juncture falls out fit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’ll make him henceforth to beware,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And tempt my fury, if he dare.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He must at least hold up his hand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By twelve freeholders to be scann’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who, by their skill in palmistry,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will quickly read his destiny;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And make him glad to read his lesson,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or take a turn for it at the session;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unless his Light and Gifts prove truer</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then ever yet they did, I’m sure;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For if he scape with whipping now,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis more than he can hope to do;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that will disengage my conscience</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of th’ obligation in his own sense,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’ll make him now by force abide</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What he by gentle means deny’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To give my honour satisfaction,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And right the Brethren in the action.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This being resolv’d, with equal speed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And conduct he approach’d his steed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with activity unwont,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Assay’d the lofty beast to mount;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which once atchiev’d, he spurr’d his palfrey,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To get from th’ enemy, and RALPH, free</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Left dangers, fears, and foes behind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And beat, at least three lengths, the wind.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
