<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Canto III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="canto-1-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
					</h3>
					<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>The scatter’d rout return and rally,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Surround the place; the Knight does sally,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And is made pris’ner: then they seize</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Th’ enchanted fort by storm, release</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Crowdero, and put th’ Squire in’s place;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I should have first said Hudibras.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</header>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>Ah me! what perils do environ</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The man that meddles with cold iron;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What plaguy mischiefs and mishaps</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do dog him still with after-claps!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For though dame Fortune seem to smile</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And leer upon him for a while,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She’ll after show him, in the nick</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all his glories, a dog-trick.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This any man may sing or say,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’ th’ ditty call’d, What if a Day?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For Hudibras, who thought h’ had won</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The field, as certain as a gun;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And having routed the whole troop,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With victory was cock-a-hoop;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thinking h’ had done enough to purchase</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thanksgiving-day among the churches,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wherein his mettle, and brave worth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Might be explain’d by Holder-forth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And register’d, by fame eternal,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In deathless pages of diurnal;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Found in few minutes, to his cost,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He did but count without his host;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that a turnstile is more certain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than, in events of war, dame Fortune.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>For now the late faint-hearted rout,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O’erthrown, and scatter’d round about,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Chas’d by the horror of their fear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From bloody fray of Knight and Bear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(All but the dogs, who, in pursuit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of the Knight’s victory, stood to’t,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And most ignobly fought to get</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The honour of his blood and sweat.)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Seeing the coast was free and clear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O’ th’ conquer’d and the conqueror,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Took heart again, and fac’d about,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if they meant to stand it out:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For by this time the routed Bear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Attack’d by th’ enemy i’ th’ rear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Finding their number grew too great</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For him to make a safe retreat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like a bold chieftain, fac’d about;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But wisely doubting to hold out,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gave way to fortune, and with haste</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fac’d the proud foe, and fled, and fac’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Retiring still, until he found</span>
						<br/>
						<span>H’ had got the advantage of the ground;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And then as valiantly made head</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To check the foe, and forthwith fled;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Leaving no art untry’d, nor trick</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of warrior stout and politic,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Until, in spite of hot pursuit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He gain’d a pass, to hold dispute</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On better terms, and stop the course</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of the proud foe. With all his force</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He bravely charg’d, and for a while</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forc’d their whole body to recoil;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But still their numbers so increas’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He found himself at length oppress’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all evasions so uncertain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To save himself for better fortune,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That he resolv’d, rather than yield,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To die with honour in the field,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And sell his hide and carcase at</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A price as high and desperate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As e’er he could. This resolution</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He forthwith put in execution,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And bravely threw himself among</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The enemy i’ th’ greatest throng;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But what could single valour do</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against so numerous a foe?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet much he did, indeed too much</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be believ’d, where th’ odds were such.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But one against a multitude</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is more than mortal can make good:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For while one party he oppos’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His rear was suddenly inclosed;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And no room left him for retreat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or fight against a foe so great.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For now the mastiffs, charging home,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To blows and handy gripes were come:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While manfully himself he bore,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And setting his right foot before,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He rais’d himself, to show how tall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His person was above them all.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This equal shame and envy stirr’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In th’ enemy, that one should beard</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So many warriors, and so stout,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As he had done, and stav’d it out,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Disdaining to lay down his arms,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yield on honourable terms.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Enraged thus, some in the rear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Attack’d him, and some ev’ry where,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till down he fell; yet falling fought,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, being down, still laid about;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As Widdrington, in doleful dumps,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is said to light upon his stumps.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But all, alas! had been in vain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And he inevitably slain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If Trulla and Cerdon, in the nick,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To rescue him had not been quick;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For Trulla, who was light of foot</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As shafts which long-field Parthians shoot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(But not so light as to be borne</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon the ears of standing corn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or trip it o’er the water quicker</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than witches, when their staves they liquor,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As some report,) was got among</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The foremost of the martial throng:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There pitying the vanquish’d bear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She call’d to Cerdon, who stood near,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Viewing the bloody fight; to whom,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall we (quoth she) stand still hum-drum,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And see stout Bruin all alone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By numbers basely overthrown?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such feats already h’ has achiev’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In story not to be believed;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And ’twould to us be shame enough,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not to attempt to fetch him off.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I would (quoth he) venture a limb</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To second thee, and rescue him;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But then we must about it straight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or else our aid will come too late.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quarter he scorns, he is so stout,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And therefore cannot long hold out.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This said, they wav’d their weapons round</span>
						<br/>
						<span>About their heads, to clear the ground;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And joining forces, laid about</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So fiercely, that th’ amazed rout</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Turn’d tail again, and straight begun,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if the Devil drove, to run.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Meanwhile th’ approach’d th’ place where Bruin</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was now engag’d to mortal ruin.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The conqu’ring foe they soon assail’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>First Trulla stav’d, and Cerdon tail’d,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-74" id="noteref-74" epub:type="noteref">74</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Until their mastiffs loos’d their hold:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yet, alas! do what they could,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The worsted Bear came off with store</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of bloody wounds, but all before:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For as Achilles, dipt in pond,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was anabaptiz’d free from wound,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made proof against dead-doing steel</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All over, but the Pagan heel;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So did our champion’s arms defend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All of him, but the other end,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His head and ears, which, in the martial</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Encounter, lost a leathern parcel:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For as an Austrian archduke once</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had one ear (which in ducatoons</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is half the coin) in battle par’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Close to his head, so Bruin far’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But tugg’d and pull’d on th’ other side,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like scriv’ner newly crucify’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or like the late corrected leathern</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ears of the circumcised brethren.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-75" id="noteref-75" epub:type="noteref">75</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>But gentle Trulla into th’ ring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He wore in’s nose, convey’d a string,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With which she march’d before, and led</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The warrior to a grassy bed.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As authors write, in a cool shade,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which eglantine and roses made;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Close by a softly murm’ring stream,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where lovers us’d to loll and dream.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There leaving him to his repose,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Secured from pursuit of foes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And wanting nothing but a song,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And a well-tun’d theorbo hung</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon a bough, to ease the pain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His tugg’d ears suffer’d, with a strain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They both drew up, to march in quest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of his great leader and the rest.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>For Orsin (who was more renown’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For stout maintaining of his ground</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In standing fight, than for pursuit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As being not so quick of foot)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was not long able to keep pace</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With others that pursu’d the chase;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But found himself left far behind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both out of heart and out of wind:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Griev’d to behold his bear pursu’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So basely by a multitude;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And like to fall, not by the prowess,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But numbers of his coward foes.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He rag’d and kept as heavy a coil as</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stout Hercules for loss of Hylas;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forcing the valleys to repeat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The accents of his sad regret.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He beat his breast, and tore his hair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For loss of his dear crony bear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That Echo, from the hollow ground,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His doleful wailings did resound</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More wistfully, by many times,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than in small poets splay-foot rhymes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That make her, in their rueful stories,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To answer to int’rogatories,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And most unconscionably depose</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To things of which she nothing knows;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when she has said all she can say,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis wrested to the lover’s fancy.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quoth he, O whither, wicked Bruin</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Art thou fled? to my⁠—Echo, Ruin?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I thought th’ hadst scorn’d to budge a step</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For fear. Quoth Echo, Marry guep.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Am not I here to take thy part?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then what has quelled thy stubborn heart?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have these bones rattled, and this head</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So often in thy quarrel bled?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor did I ever winch or grudge it,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For thy dear sake. Quoth she, Mum budget.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Think’st thou ’twill not be laid i’ th’ dish</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou turn’dst thy back? Quoth Echo, Pish.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To run from those th’ hast overcome</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thus cowardly? Quoth Echo, Mum.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But what a vengeance makes thee fly</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From me, too, as thine enemy?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or if thou hast no thought of me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor what I have endur’d for thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet shame and honour might prevail</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To keep thee thus from turning tail:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For who would grudge to spend his blood in</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His honour’s cause? Quoth she, A puddin.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This said, his grief to anger turn’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which in his manly stomach burn’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thirst of revenge, and wrath, in place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of sorrow, now began to blaze.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He vow’d the authors of his woe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Should equal vengeance undergo;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with their bones and flesh pay dear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For what he suffer’d, and his bear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This b’ing resolv’d, with equal speed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And rage he hasted to proceed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To action straight; and giving o’er</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To search for Bruin any more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He went in quest of Hudibras,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To find him out where’er he was;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, if he were above ground, vow’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He’d ferret him, lurk where he would.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But scarce had he a furlong on</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This resolute adventure gone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When he encounter’d with that crew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom Hudibras did late subdue.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Honour, revenge, contempt, and shame,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did equally their breasts inflame.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Mong these the fierce Magnano was,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Talgol, foe to Hudibras;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cerdon and Colon, warriors stout,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As resolute, as ever fought;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom furious Orsin thus bespoke:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall we (quoth he) thus basely brook</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The vile affront that paltry ass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And feeble scoundrel Hudibras,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With that more paltry ragamuffin,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ralpho, with vapouring and huffing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have put upon us like tame cattle,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if th’ had routed us in battle!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For my part, it shall ne’er be said,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I for the washing gave my head:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor did I turn my back for fear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O’ th’ rascals, but loss of my bear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which now I’m like to undergo;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For whether those fell wounds, or no,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He has receiv’d in fight, are mortal,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is more than all my skill can foretell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor do I know what is become</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of him, more than the pope of Rome.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But if I can but find them out</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That caus’d it (as I shall, no doubt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where’er th’ in hugger-mugger lurk)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’ll make them rue their handy-work;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And wish that they had rather dar’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To pull the devil by the beard.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth Cerdon, Noble Orsin, th’ hast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Great reason to do as thou say’st,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And so has ev’ry body here,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As well as thou hast or thy bear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Others may do as they see good;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But if this twig be made of wood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That will hold tack, I’ll make the fur</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fly ’bout the ears of that old cur;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And th’ other mongrel vermin, Ralph,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That brav’d us all in his behalf.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy bear is safe, and out of peril,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though lugg’d indeed, and wounded very ill;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Myself and Trulla made a shift</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To help him out at a dead lift;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And having brought him bravely off,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have left him where he’s safe enough:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There let him rest; for if we stay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The slaves may hap to get away.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This said, they all engag’d to join</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their forces in the same design;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And forthwith put themselves in search</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Hudibras upon their march.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where leave we awhile, to tell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What the victorious knight befel:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For such, Crowdero being fast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In dungeon shut, we left him last.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Triumphant laurels seem’d to grow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No where so green as on his brow;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Laden with which, as well as tir’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With conquering toil he now retir’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unto a neighb’ring castle by,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To rest his body, and apply</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fit med’cines to each glorious bruise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He got in fight, reds, blacks, and blues,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To mollify the uneasy pang</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of ev’ry honourable bang,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which b’ing by skilful midwife drest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He laid him down to take his rest.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But all in vain. H’ had got a hurt</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O’ th’ inside, of a deadlier sort,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Cupid made, who took his stand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon a widow’s jointure land,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(For he, in all his am’rous battles,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No ’dvantage finds like goods and chattels,)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Drew home his bow, and, aiming right,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let fly an arrow at the Knight:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The shaft against a rib did glance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And gall’d him in the purtenance.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But time had somewhat ’suag’d his pain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>After he found his suit in vain.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For that proud dame, for whom his soul</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was burnt in ’s belly like a coal,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(That belly which so oft did ake</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And suffer griping for her sake,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till purging comfits and ants’-eggs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had almost brought him off his legs,)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Us’d him so like a base rascallion,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That old Pyg⁠—(what d’y’ call him) malion,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-76" id="noteref-76" epub:type="noteref">76</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>That cut his mistress out of stone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had not so hard a hearted one.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She had a thousand Jadish tricks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Worse than a mule that flings and kicks;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Mong which one cross-grain’d freak she had,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As insolent as strange and mad;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She could love none, but only such</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As scorn’d and hated her as much.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Twas a strange riddle of a lady:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not love, if any lov’d her! Hey-dey!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So cowards never use their might,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But against such as will not fight;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So some diseases have been found</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Only to seize upon the sound.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He that gets her by heart, must say her</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The back way, like a witch’s prayer.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Meanwhile the Knight had no small task</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To compass what he durst not ask.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He loves, but dares not make the motion;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her ignorance is his devotion:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like caitiff vile, that, for misdeed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rides with his face to rump of steed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or rowing scull, he’s fain to love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Look one way, and another move;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or like a tumbler, that does play</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His game, and look another way,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Until he seize upon the cony;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Just so he does by matrimony:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But all in vain; her subtle snout</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did quickly wind his meaning out;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which she return’d with too much scorn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be by man of honour borne:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet much he bore, until the distress</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He suffer’d from his spiteful mistress</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did stir his stomach; and the pain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He had endur’d from her disdain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Turn’d to regret so resolute,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That he resolv’d to wave his suit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And either to renounce her quite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or for a while play least in sight.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This resolution b’ing put on,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He kept some months, and more had done,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But being brought so nigh by fate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The victory he achiev’d so late</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did set his thoughts agog, and ope</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A door to discontinu’d hope,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That seem’d to promise he might win</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His dame too, now his hand was in;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that his valour, and the honour</span>
						<br/>
						<span>H’ had newly gain’d, might work upon her.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These reasons made his mouth to water</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With am’rous longings to be at her.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth he, unto himself, Who knows,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But this brave conquest o’er my foes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>May reach her heart, and make that stoop,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As I but now have forc’d the troop?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If nothing can oppugn love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And virtue invious ways can prove,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What may he not confide to do</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That brings both love and virtue too?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But thou bring’st valour too and wit:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Two things that seldom fail to hit.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Valour’s a mouse-trap, wit a gin,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which women oft are taken in.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then, Hudibras, why should’st thou fear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be, that art a conqueror?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fortune th’ audacious doth <i xml:lang="la">juvare</i>,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But lets the timidous miscarry.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then while the honour thou hast got</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is spick and span new, piping hot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Strike her up bravely, thou hadst best,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And trust thy fortune with the rest.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Such thoughts as these the Knight did keep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More than his bangs or fleas, from sleep.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as an owl, that in a barn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sees a mouse creeping in the corn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sits still, and shuts his round blue eyes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if he slept, until he spies</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The little beast within his reach,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then starts, and seizes on the wretch;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So from his couch the Knight did start</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To seize upon the widow’s heart;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Crying with hasty tone, and hoarse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ralpho, dispatch; to horse, to horse.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And ’twas but time; for now the rout,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We left engag’d to seek him out,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By speedy marches, were advanc’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Up to the fort, where he ensconc’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all th’ avenues had possest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>About the place, from east to west.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>That done, a while they made a halt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To view the ground, and where t’ assault:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then call’d a council, which was best,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By siege or onslaught, to invest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The enemy; and ’twas agreed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By storm and onslaught to proceed.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This b’ing resolv’d, in comely sort</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They now drew up t’ attack the fort:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When Hudibras, about to enter</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon another-gates adventure,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To Ralpho call’d aloud to arm,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not dreaming of approaching storm.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>whether dame Fortune, or the care</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of angel bad or tutelar,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did arm, or thrust him on a danger</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To which he was an utter stranger,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That foresight might, or might not, blot</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The glory he had newly got;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For to his shame it might be said,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They took him napping in his bed;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To them we leave it to expound,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That deal in sciences profound.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>His courser scarce he had bestrid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Ralpho that on which he rid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When setting ope the postern gate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which they thought best to sally at,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The foe appear’d, drawn up and drill’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ready to charge them in the field.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This somewhat startled the bold Knight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Surpris’d with th’ unexpected sight:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The bruises of his bones and flesh</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He thought began to smart afresh;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till recollecting wonted courage,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His fear was soon converted to rage,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thus he spoke: The coward foe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom we but now gave quarter to,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Look, yonder’s rally’d, and appears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if they had outrun their fears.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The glory we did lately get,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Fates command us to repeat;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to their wills we must succumb,</span>
						<br/>
						<span><i xml:lang="la">Quocunque trahunt</i>, ’tis our doom.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This is the same numeric crew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which we so lately did subdue;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The self-same individuals that</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did run as mice do from a cat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When we courageously did wield</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our martial weapons in the field,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To tug for victory; and when</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We shall our shining blades agen</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Brandish in terror o’er our heads,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They’ll straight resume their wonted dreads.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fear is an ague, that forsakes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And haunts by fits those whom it takes;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And they’ll opine they feel the pain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And blows they felt to-day again.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then let us boldly charge them home,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And make no doubt to overcome.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This said, his courage to inflame,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He call’d upon his mistress’ name.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His pistol next he cock’d anew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And out his nut-brown whinyard drew;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, placing Ralpho in the front,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Reserv’d himself to bear the brunt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As expert warriors use: then ply’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With iron heel his courser’s side,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Conveying sympathetic speed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From heel of Knight to heel of steed.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Meanwhile the foe, with equal rage</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And speed, advancing to engage;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both parties now were drawn so close,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Almost to come to handy-blows;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When Orsin first let fly a stone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At Ralpho; not so huge a one</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As that which Diomed did maul</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Æneas on the bum withal;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet big enough, if rightly hurl’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>T’ have sent him to another world,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether above-ground, or below,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which saints twice dipt are destin’d to.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The danger startled the bold Squire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And made him some few steps retire;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But Hudibras advanc’d to’ ’s aid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And rous’d his spirits, half dismay’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He, wisely doubting lest the shot</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of th’ enemy, now growing hot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Might at a distance gall, press’d close,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To come pell-mell to handy-blows,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, that he might their aim decline,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Advanc’d still in an oblique line;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But prudently forbore to fire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till breast to breast he had got nigher,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As expert warriors use to do</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When hand to hand they charge their foe.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This order the advent’rous Knight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Most soldier-like, observ’d in fight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When fortune (as she’s wont) turn’d fickle,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And for the foe began to stickle.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The more shame for her goodyship,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To give so near a friend the slip.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For Colon, choosing out a stone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Levell’d so right, it thump’d upon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His manly paunch with such a force,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As almost beat him off his horse.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He lost his whinyard, and the rein;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, laying fast hold of the mane,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Preserv’d his seat; and as a goose</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In death contracts his talons close,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So did the Knight, and with one claw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The trigger of his pistol draw.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The gun went off: and as it was</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still fatal to stout Hudibras,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In all his feats of arms, when least</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He dreamt of it, to prosper best,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So now he far’d: the shot, let fly</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At random ’mong the enemy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pierc’d Talgol’s gaberdine, and grazing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon his shoulder, in the passing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lodg’d in Magnano’s brass habergeon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who straight, A surgeon! cry’d, a surgeon!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He tumbled down, and, as he fell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did Murther! Murther! Murther! yell.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This startled their whole body so,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That if the Knight had not let go</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His arms, but been in warlike plight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>H’ had won (the second time) the fight;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As, if the Squire had but fall’n on,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He had inevitably done:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But he, diverted with the care</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or Hudibras his hurt, forbare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To press th’ advantage of his fortune,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While danger did the rest dishearten:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For he with Cerdon b’ing engag’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In close encounter, they both wag’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The fight so well, ’twas hard to say</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which side was like to get the day.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And now the busy work of death</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had tir’d them, so th’ agreed to breathe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Preparing to renew the fight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When the disaster of the Knight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And th’ other party, did divert</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their fell intent, and forc’d them part.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ralpho press’d up to Hudibras,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Cerdon where Magnano was;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Each striving to confirm his party</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With stout encouragements and hearty.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth Ralpho, Courage, valiant Sir,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And let revenge and honour stir</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your spirits up: once more fall on,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The shatter’d foe begins to run:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For if but half so well you knew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To use your victory as subdue,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They durst not, after such a blow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As you have given them, face us now;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But from so formidable a soldier</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had fled like crows when they smell powder.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thrice have they seen your sword aloft</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wav’d o’er their heads, and fled as oft;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But if you let them recollect</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their spirits, now dismay’d and checkt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You’ll have a harder game to play</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than yet y’ have had to get the day.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thus spoke the stout Squire; but was heard</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Hudibras with small regard.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His thoughts were fuller of the bang</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be lately took, than Ralph’s harangue;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To which he answer’d, Cruel Fate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tells me thy counsel comes too late.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The knotted blood within my hose,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That from my wounded body flows,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With mortal crisis doth portend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My days to appropinque an end.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I am for action now unfit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Either of fortitude or wit:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fortune, my foe, begins to frown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Resolv’d to pull my stomach down.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I am not apt, upon a wound,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or trivial basting, to despond:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet I’d be loth my days to curtail:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For if I thought my wounds not mortal,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or that we’d time enough as yet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make an hon’rable retreat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Twere the best course: but if they find</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We fly, and leave our arms behind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For them to seize on, the dishonour,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And danger too, is such, I’ll sooner</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stand to it boldly, and take quarter,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To let them see I am no starter.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In all the trade of war, no feat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is nobler than a brave retreat:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For those that run away, and fly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Take place at least of th’ enemy.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This said, the Squire with active speed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dismounted from his bony steed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To seize the arms, which, by mischance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fell from the bold Knight in a trance.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These being found out, and restor’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To Hudibras, their natural lord,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As a man may say, with might and main</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He hasted to get up again.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thrice he assay’d to mount aloft,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, by his weighty bum, as oft</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He was pull’d back, till having found</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ advantage of the rising ground,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thither he led his warlike steed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And having plac’d him right, with speed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prepar’d again to scale the beast;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When Orsin, who had newly dress’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The bloody scar upon the shoulder</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Talgol with Promethean powder,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And now was searching for the shot</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That laid Magnano on the spot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beheld the sturdy Squire aforesaid</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Preparing to climb up his horse’ side.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He left his cure, and laying hold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon his arms, with courage bold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cry’d out, ’Tis now no time to dally,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The enemy begin to rally;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let us, that are unhurt and whole,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fall on, and happy man be’s dole.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This said, like to a thunderbolt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He flew with fury to th’ assault,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Striving the enemy to attack</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before he reach’d his horse’s back.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ralpho was mounted now, and gotten</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O’erthwart his beast with active vau’ting,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wriggling his body to recover</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His seat, and cast his right leg over,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When Orsin, rushing in, bestow’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On horse and man so heavy a load,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The beast was startled, and begun</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To kick and fling like mad, and run,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bearing the tough Squire like a sack,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or stout king Richard, on his back;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till stumbling, he threw him down,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sore bruis’d, and cast into a swoon.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Meanwhile the Knight began to rouse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sparkles of his wonted prowess:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He thrust his hand into his hose,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And found, both by his eyes and nose,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Twas only choler, and not blood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That from his wounded body flow’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This, with the hazard of the Squire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Inflam’d him with despiteful ire:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Courageously he fac’d about,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And drew his other pistol out,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And now had half way bent the cock,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When Cerdon gave so fierce a shock,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With sturdy truncheon, ’thwart his arm,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That down it fell, and did no harm:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then stoutly pressing on with speed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Assay’d to pull him off his steed.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Knight his sword had only left,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With which he Cerdon’s head had cleft,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or at the least cropt off a limb,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But Orsin came, and rescu’d him.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He, with his lance, attack’d the Knight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon his quarters opposite:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But as a bark, that in foul weather,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Toss’d by two adverse winds together,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is bruis’d, and beaten to and fro,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And knows not which to turn him to;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So far’d the Knight between two foes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And knew not which of them t’oppose;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till Orsin, charging with his lance</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At Hudibras, by spiteful chance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hit Cerdon such a bang, as stunn’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And laid him flat upon the ground.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At this the Knight began to cheer up,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, raising up himself on stirrup,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cry’d out, Victoria! lie thou there,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I shall straight dispatch another,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To bear thee company in death;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But first I’ll halt a while, and breathe:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As well he might; for Orsin, griev’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At th’ wound that Cerdon had receiv’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ran to relieve him with his lore,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And cure the hurt he gave before.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Meanwhile the Knight had wheel’d about,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To breathe himself, and next find out</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ advantage of the ground, where best</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He might the ruffled foe infest.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This b’ing resolv’d, he spurr’d his steed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To run at Orsin with full speed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While he was busy in the care</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Cerdon’s wound, and unaware;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But he was quick, and had already</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unto the part apply’d remedy;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, seeing th’ enemy prepar’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Drew up, and stood upon his guard.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then, like a warrior right expert</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And skilful in the martial art,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The subtle Knight straight made a halt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And judg’d it best to stay th’ assault,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Until he had reliev’d the Squire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And then in order to retire;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or, as occasion should invite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With forces join’d renew the fight.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ralpho, by this time disentranc’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon his bum himself advanc’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though sorely bruis’d; his limbs all o’er</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With ruthless bangs were stiff and sore.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Right fain he would have got upon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His feet again, to get him gone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When Hudibras to aid him came:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quoth he (and call’d him by his name,)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Courage! the day at length is ours;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And we once more, as conquerors,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have both the field and honour won:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The foe is profligate, and run.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I mean all such as can; for some</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This hand hath sent to their long home;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And some lie sprawling on the ground,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With many a gash and bloody wound.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Caesar himself could never say</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He got two victories in a day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As I have done, that can say, Twice I</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In one day, Veni, Vidi, Vici.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The foe’s so numerous, that we</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cannot so often <i xml:lang="la">vincere</i></span>
						<br/>
						<span>As they <i xml:lang="la">perire</i>, and yet enow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be left to strike an after-blow;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then, lest they rally, and once more</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Put us to fight the bus’ness o’er,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Get up, and mount thy steed: Dispatch,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And let us both their motions watch.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth Ralph, I should not, if I were</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In case for action, now be here:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor have I turn’d my back, or hang’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An arse, for fear of being bang’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It was for you I got these harms,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Advent’ring to fetch off your arms.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The blows and drubs I have receiv’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have bruis’d my body, and bereav’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My limbs of strength. Unless you stoop,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And reach your hand to pull me up,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I shall lie here, and be a prey</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To those who now are run away.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>That thou shalt not (quoth Hudibras;)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We read the ancients held it was</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More honourable far, <i xml:lang="la">servare</i></span>
						<br/>
						<span><i xml:lang="la">Civem</i>, than slay an adversary:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The one we oft to-day have done,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The other shall dispatch anon:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And though th’ art of a different church,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I will not leave thee in the lurch.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This said, he jogg’d his good steed nigher,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And steer’d him gently towards the Squire;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then bowing down his body, stretch’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His hand out, and at Ralpho reach’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When Trulla, whom he did not mind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Charg’d him like lightening behind.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She had been long in search about</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Magnano’s wound, to find it out;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But could find none, nor where the shot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That had so startled him, was got:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But having found the worst was past,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She fell to her own work at last,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The pillage of the prisoners,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which in all feats of arms was hers;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And now to plunder Ralph she flew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When Hudibras his hard fate drew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To succour him; for, as he bow’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To help him up, she laid a load</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of blows so heavy, and plac’d so well,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On t’ other side, that down he fell.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yield, scoundrel base (quoth she,) or die:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy life is mine, and liberty:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But if thou think’st I took thee tardy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And dar’st presume to be so hardy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To try thy fortune o’er afresh,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’ll wave my title to thy flesh;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy arms and baggage, now my right;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And if thou hast the heart to try ’t,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’ll lend thee back thyself a while,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And once more, for that carcass vile,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fight upon tick.—Quoth Hudibras,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou offer’st nobly, valiant lass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I shall take thee at thy word.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>First let me rise and take my sword;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That sword which has so oft this day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through squadrons of my foes made way,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And some to other worlds dispatch’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now with a feeble spinster match’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will blush with blood ignoble stain’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By which no honour’s to be gain’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But if thou’lt take m’ advice in this,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Consider whilst thou may’st, what ’tis</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To interrupt a victor’s course,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>B’ opposing such a trivial force:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For if with conquest I come off,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(And that I shall do, sure enough,)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quarter thou canst not have, nor grace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By law of arms, in such a case;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both which I now do offer freely.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I scorn (quoth she) thou coxcomb silly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(Clapping her hand upon her breech,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To show how much she priz’d his speech,)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quarter or counsel from a foe;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If thou can’st force me to it, do.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But lest it should again be said,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When I have once more won thy head,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I took thee napping, unprepar’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Arm, and betake thee to thy guard.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This said, she to her tackle fell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And on the Knight let fall a peal</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of blows so fierce, and press’d so home,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That he retir’d, and follow’d ’s bum.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stand to ’t (quoth she) or yield to mercy:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It is not fighting arsie-versie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall serve thy turn.—This stirr’d his spleen</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More than the danger he was in,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The blows he felt, or was to feel,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Although th’ already made him reel.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Honour, despight, revenge and shame,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At once into his stomach came,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which fir’d it so, he rais’d his arm</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Above his head, and rain’d a storm</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of blows so terrible and thick,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if he meant to hash her quick.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But she upon her truncheon took them,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And by oblique diversion broke them,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Waiting an opportunity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To pay all back with usury,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which long she fail’d not of; for now</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Knight with one dead-doing blow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Resolving to decide the fight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And she with quick and cunning slight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Avoiding it, the force and weight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He charg’d upon it was so great,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As almost sway’d him to the ground.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No sooner she th’ advantage found,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But in she flew; and seconding</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With home-made thrust the heavy swing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She laid him flat upon his side;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And mounting on his trunk astride,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quoth she, I told thee what would come</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all thy vapouring, base scum.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Say, will the law of arms allow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I may have grace and quarter now?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or wilt thou rather break thy word,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And stain thine honour, than thy sword?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A man of war to damn his soul,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In basely breaking his parole;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when, before the fight, th’ had’st vow’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To give no quarter in cold blood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now thou hast got me for a Tartar,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make me ’gainst my will take quarter;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why dost not put me to the sword,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But cowardly fly from thy word?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth Hudibras, The day’s thine own;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou and thy stars have cast me down;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My laurels are transplanted now,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And flourish on thy conqu’ring brow:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My loss of honour’s great enough,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou need’st not brand it with a scoff:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sarcasms may eclipse thine own,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But cannot blur my lost renown.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I am not now in Fortune’s power;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He that is down can fall no lower.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The ancient heroes were illustrious</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For being benign, and not blustrous,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against a vanquish’d foe: their swords</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were sharp and trenchant, not their words;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And did in fight but cut work out</span>
						<br/>
						<span>T’ employ their courtesies about.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth she, Although thou hast deserv’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Base slubberdegullion, to be serv’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As thou did’st vow to deal with me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If thou had’st got the victory;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet I shall rather act a part</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That suits my fame than thy desert.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy arms, thy liberty, beside</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All that’s on th’ outside of thy hide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are mine by military law,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of which I will not hate one straw:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The rest, thy life and limbs, once more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though doubly forfeit, I restore,</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth Hudibras, It is too late</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For me to treat or stipulate:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What thou command’st, I must obey:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet those whom I expugn’d to-day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of thine own party, I let go,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And gave them life and freedom too:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both dogs and bear, upon their parole,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom I took pris’ners in this quarrel.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quoth Trulla, Whether thou or they</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let one another run away,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Concerns not me: but was’t not thou</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That gave Crowdero quarter too?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Crowdero, whom, in irons bound,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou basely threw’st into Lob’s pound,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where still he lies, and with regret</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His gen’rous bowels rage and fret.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But now thy carcass shall redeem</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And serve to be exchang’d for him.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This said, the Knight did straight submit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And laid his weapons at her feet.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Next he disrob’d his gaberdine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with it did himself resign.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She took it, and forthwith divesting</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The mantle that she wore, said jesting,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Take that, and wear it for my sake;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then threw it o’er his sturdy back,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as the French, we conquer’d once,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now give us laws for pantaloons,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-77" id="noteref-77" epub:type="noteref">77</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>The length of breeches, and the gathers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Port-cannons, periwigs, and feathers;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Just so the proud insulting lass</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Array’d and dighted Hudibras.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Meanwhile the other champions, yerst</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In hurry of the fight disperst,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Arriv’d when Trulla won the day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To share in th’ honour and the prey,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And out of Hudibras his hide</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With vengeance to be satisfy’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which now they were about to pour</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon him in a wooden show’r;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But Trulla thrust herself between,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And striding o’er his back agen,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She brandish’d o’er her head his sword,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And vow’d they should not break her word:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sh’ had giv’n him quarter, and her blood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or theirs should make that quarter good;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For she was bound, by law of arms,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To see him safe from further harms,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In dungeon deep Crowdero, cast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By Hudibras, as yet lay fast;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where, to the hard and ruthless stones,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His great heart made perpetual moans:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Him she resolv’d that Hudibras</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Should ransom, and supply his place.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This stopp’d their fury, and the basting</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which toward Hudibras was hasting.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They thought it was but just and right</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That what she had achiev’d in fight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She should dispose of how she pleas’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Crowdero ought to be releas’d:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor could that any way be done</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So well as this she pitch’d upon:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For who a better could imagine?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This therefore they resolv’d t’ engage in.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Knight and Squire first they made</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rise from the ground where they were laid;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then mounted both upon their horses,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But with their faces to the arses;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Orsin led Hudibras’s beast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Talgol that which Ralpho prest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom stout Magnano, valiant Cerdon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Colon, waited as a guard on;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All ush’ring Trulla in the rear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With th’ arms of either prisoner.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In this proud order and array</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They put themselves upon their way,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Striving to reach th’ enchanted castle,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where stout Crowdero in durance lay still.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thither with greater speed than shows</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And triumph over conquer’d foes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do use t’ allow, or than the bears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or pageants borne before lord mayors</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are wont to use, they soon arriv’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In order, soldier-like contriv’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still marching in a warlike posture,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As fit for battle as for muster.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Knight and Squire they first unhorse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And bending ’gainst the fort their force,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They all advanc’d, and round about</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Begirt the magical redoubt.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Magnan led up in this adventure,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And made way for the rest to enter;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For he was skilful in black art,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No less than he that built the fort;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with an iron mace laid flat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A breach, which straight all enter’d at,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in the wooden dungeon found</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Crowdero laid upon the ground.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Him they release from durance base,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Restor’d t’ his fiddle and his case,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And liberty, his thirsty rage</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With luscious vengeance to assuage:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For he no sooner was at large,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But Trulla straight brought on the charge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in the self-same limbo put</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Knight and Squire where he was shut;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where leaving them in Hockley i’ th’ Hole,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their bangs and durance to condole,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Confin’d and conjur’d into narrow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Enchanted mansion to know sorrow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the same order and array</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which they advanc’d, they march’d away.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But Hudibras who scorn’d to stoop</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To Fortune, or be said to droop,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cheer’d up himself with ends of verse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And sayings of philosophers.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth he, Th’ one half of man, his mind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is, sui juris, unconfin’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And cannot be laid by the heels,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whate’er the other moiety feels.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis not restraint or liberty</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That makes men prisoners or free;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But perturbations that possess</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The mind, or æquanimities.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The whole world was not half so wide</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To Alexander, when he cry’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because he had but one to subdue,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As was a paltry narrow tub to</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Diogenes, who is not said</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(For aught that ever I could read)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To whine, put finger i’ th’ eye, and sob,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because h’ had ne’er another tub.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The ancients make two sev’ral kinds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of prowess in heroic minds;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The active, and the passive valiant;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both which are <i xml:lang="la">pari libra</i> gallant:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For both to give blows, and to carry,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In fights are equi-necessary:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But in defeats, the passive stout</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are always found to stand it out</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Most desp’rately, and to outdo</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The active ’gainst the conqu’ring foe.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tho’ we with blacks and blues are suggill’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or, as the vulgar say, are cudgell’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He that is valiant, and dares fight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though drubb’d, can lose no honour by’t.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Honour’s a lease for lives to come,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And cannot be extended from</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The legal tenant; ’tis a chattel</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not to be forfeited in battle.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If he that in the field is slain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be in the bed of honour lain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He that is beaten may be said</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To lie in honour’s truckle-bed.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For as we see th’ eclipsed sun</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By mortals is more gaz’d upon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than when, adorn’d with all his light,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He shines in serene sky most bright;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So valour, in a low estate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is most admir’d and wonder’d at.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth Ralph, How great I do not know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We may by being beaten grow;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But none, that see how here we sit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will judge us overgrown with wit.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As gifted brethren, preaching by</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A carnal hour-glass, do imply,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Illumination can convey</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into them what they have to say,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But not how much; so well enough</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Know you to charge, but not draw off:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For who, without a cap and bauble,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Having subdu’d a bear and rabble,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And might with honour have come off,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would put it to a second proof?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A politic exploit, right fit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For Presbyterian zeal and wit.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth Hudibras, That cuckoo’s tone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ralpho, thou always harp’st upon.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When thou at any thing would’st rail,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou mak’st Presbytery the scale</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To take the height on’t, and explain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To what degree it is profane:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whats’ever will not with (thy what d’ye call)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy light jump right, thou call’st synodical;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if Presbytery were the standard</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To size whats’ever ’s to be slander’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dost not remember how this day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou to my beard wast bold to say,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That thou coud’st prove bear-baiting equal</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With synods orthodox and legal?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do if thou canst; for I deny’t,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And dare thee to ’t with all thy light.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth Ralpho, Truly that is no</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hard matter for a man to do,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That has but any guts in ’s brains,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And could believe it worth his pains;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But since you dare and urge me to it,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You’ll find I’ve light enough to do it.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Synods are mystical bear-gardens,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where elders, deputies, churchwardens,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And other members of the court,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Manage the Babylonish sport;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For prolocutor, scribe, and bear-ward,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do differ only in a mere word;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both are but sev’ral synagogues</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of carnal men, and bears, and dogs:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both anti-christian assemblies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To mischief bent, far as in them lies;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both stave and tail with fierce contests,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The one with men, the other beasts.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The diff’rence is, the one fights with</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The tongue, the other with the teeth;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that they bait but bears in this,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In th’ other, souls and consciences;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where Saints themselves are brought to stake</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For gospel-light, and conscience’ sake;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Expos’d to Scribes and Presbyters,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Instead of mastiff dogs and curs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than whom th’ have less humanity;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For these at souls of men will fly.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This to the prophet did appear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who in a vision saw a bear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prefiguring the beastly rage</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of church-rule in this latter age:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As is demonstrated at full</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By him that baited the Pope’s bull.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-78" id="noteref-78" epub:type="noteref">78</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bears nat’rally are beasts of prey,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That live by rapine; so do they.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What are their orders, constitutions,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Church-censures, curses, absolutions,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But sev’ral mystic chains they make,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To tie poor Christians to the stake,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And then set heathen officers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Instead of dogs, about their ears?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For to prohibit and dispense;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To find out or to make offence;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of hell and heaven to dispose;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To play with souls at fast and loose;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To set what characters they please,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And mulcts on sin or godliness;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Reduce the Church to gospel-order,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By rapine, sacrilege, and murder;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make Presbytery supreme,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Kings themselves submit to them;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And force all people, though against</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their consciences, to turn saints;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Must prove a pretty thriving trade,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When Saints monopolists are made:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When pious frauds, and holy shifts,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are dispensations and gifts,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their godliness becomes mere ware,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And ev’ry synod but a fair.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Synods are whelps of th’ Inquisition,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A mongrel breed of like pernicion;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And growing up, became the sires</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of scribes, commissioners, and triers;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose bus’ness is, by cunning sleight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To cast a figure for men’s light;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To find, in lines of beard and face,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The physiognomy of grace;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And by the sound and twang of nose,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If all be sound within disclose,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Free from a crack or flaw of sinning,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As men try pipkins by the ringing;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By black caps, underlaid with white,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Give certain guess at inward light.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which serjeants at the gospel wear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make the spiritual calling clear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The handkerchief about the neck</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(Canonical cravat of Smeck,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-79" id="noteref-79" epub:type="noteref">79</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>From whom the institution came,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When church and state they set on flame,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And worn by them as badges then</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of spiritual warfaring men)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Judge rightly if regeneration</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be of the newest cut in fashion.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sure ’tis an orthodox opinion,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That grace is founded in dominion.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Great piety consists in pride;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To rule is to be sanctified:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To domineer, and to control,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both o’er the body and the soul,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is the most perfect discipline</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of church-rule, and by right divine.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bel and the Dragon’s chaplains were</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More moderate than these by far:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For they (poor knaves) were glad to cheat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To get their wives and children meat;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But these will not be fobb’d off so;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They must have wealth and power too,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or else with blood and desolation</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They’ll tear it out o’ th’ heart o’ th’ nation.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Sure these themselves from primitive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Heathen Priesthood do derive,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When butchers were the only clerks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Elders and presbyters of kirks;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose directory was to kill;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And some believe it is so still.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The only diff’rence is, that then</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They slaughter’d only beasts, now men.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For then to sacrifice a bullock,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or now and then a child to Moloch,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They count a vile abomination,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But not to slaughter a whole nation.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Presbytery does but translate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Papacy to a free state;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A commonwealth of Popery,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where ev’ry village is a See</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As well as Rome, and must maintain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A tithe-pig metropolitan;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where ev’ry presbyter and deacon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Commands the keys for cheese and bacon;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And ev’ry hamlet’s governed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By ’s Holiness, the church’s head;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More haughty and severe in ’s place,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than Gregory or Boniface.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such Church must (surely) be a monster</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With many heads: for if we conster</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What in th’ Apocalypse we find,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>According to th’ apostle’s mind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis that the whore of Babylon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With many heads did ride upon;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which heads denote the sinful tribe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of deacon, priest, lay-elder, scribe.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Lay-elder, Simeon to Levi,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose little finger is as heavy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As loins of patriarchs, prince-prelate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And bishop-secular. This zealot</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is of a mongrel, diverse kind;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cleric before, and lay behind;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A lawless linseywoolsey brother,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Half of one order, half another;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A creature of amphibious nature,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On land a beast, a fish in water;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That always preys on grace or sin;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A sheep without, a wolf within.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This fierce inquisitor has chief</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dominion over men’s belief</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And manners; can pronounce a saint</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Idolatrous or ignorant,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When superciliously he sifts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through coarsest boulter others’ gifts;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For all men live and judge amiss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose talents jump not just with his.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He’ll lay on gifts with hands, and place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On dullest noddle light and grace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The manufacture of the kirk.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those pastors are but th’ handy-work</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of his mechanic paws, instilling</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Divinity in them by feeling;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From whence they start up chosen vessels,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made by contact, as men get measles.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So cardinals, they say, do grope</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At th’ other end the new-made pope.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-80" id="noteref-80" epub:type="noteref">80</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Hold, hold, quoth Hudibras; soft fire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They say, does make sweet malt. Good Squire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Festina lente, not too fast;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For haste (the proverb says) makes waste.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The quirks and cavils thou dost make</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are false, and built upon mistake:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I shall bring you, with your pack</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of fallacies, t’ elenchi back;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And put your arguments in mood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And figure to be understood.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’ll force you, by right ratiocination,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To leave your vitilitigation,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-81" id="noteref-81" epub:type="noteref">81</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And make you keep to th’ question close,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And argue dialecticos.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The question then, to state it first,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is, Which is better, or which worst,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Synods or bears? Bears I avow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be the worst, and synods thou.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But to make good th’ assertion,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou say’st they’re really all one.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If so, not worst; for if th’ are idem</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why then, <i xml:lang="la">tantundem dat tantidem</i>.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For if they are the same, by course,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Neither is better, neither worse.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But I deny they are the same,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More than a maggot and I am.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That both are animalia</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I grant, but not rationalia:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For though they do agree in kind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Specific difference we find;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And can no more make bears of these,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than prove my horse is Socrates.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That synods are bear-gardens too,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou dost affirm; but I say, No:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thus I prove it in a word;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whats’ver assembly’s not impow’r’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To censure, curse, absolve, and ordain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can be no synod: but bear-garden</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Has no such pow’r; ergo, ’tis none:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And so thy sophistry’s o’erthrown.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But yet we are beside the question</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which thou didst raise the first contest on;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For that was, Whether bears are better</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than synod-men? I say, <i xml:lang="la">Negatur</i>.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That bears are beasts, and synods men,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is held by all: they’re better then;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For bears and dogs on four legs go,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As beasts, but synod-men on two.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis true, they all have teeth and nails;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But prove that synod-men have tails;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or that a rugged, shaggy fur</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Grows o’er the hide of presbyter;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or that his snout and spacious ears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do hold proportion with a bear’s.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A bear’s a savage beast, of all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Most ugly and unnatural</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whelp’d without form, until the dam</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Has lick’d it into shape and frame:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But all thy light can ne’er evict,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That ever synod man was lick’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or brought to any other fashion</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than his own will and inclination.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But thou dost further yet in this</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Oppugn thyself and sense; that is,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou would’st have presbyters to go</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For bears and dogs, and bear-wards too;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A strange chimera of beasts and men,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made up of pieces heterogene;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such as in nature never met</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In <i xml:lang="la">eodem subjecto</i> yet.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy other arguments are all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Supposures, hypothetical,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That do but beg, and we may chose</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Either to grant them, or refuse.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Much thou hast said, which I know when</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And where thou stol’st from other men,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whereby ’tis plain thy light and gifts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are all but plagiary shifts;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And is the same that Ranter said,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who, arguing with me, broke my head,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And tore a handful of my beard:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The self-same cavils then I heard,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When, b’ing in hot dispute about</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This controversy, we fell out:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And what thou know’st I answer’d then,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will serve to answer thee agen.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth Ralpho, Nothing but th’ abuse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of human learning you produce;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Learning, that cobweb of the brain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Profane, erroneous, and vain;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A trade of knowledge, as replete</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As others are with fraud and cheat;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An art t’ incumber gifts and wit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And render both for nothing fit;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Makes light unactive, dull, and troubled,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like little David in Saul’s doublet:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A cheat that scholars put upon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Other men’s reason and their own;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A fort of error, to ensconce</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Absurdity and ignorance;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That renders all the avenues</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To truth impervious and abstruse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By making plain things, in debate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By art, perplex’d, and intricate:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For nothing goes for sense or light</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That will not with old rules jump right:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if rules were not in the schools</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deriv’d from truth, but truth from rules.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This Pagan heathenish invention</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is good for nothing but contention.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For as, in sword and buckler fight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All blows do on the target light;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So when men argue, the great’st part</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O’ th’ contest falls on terms of art,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Until the fustian stuff be spent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And then they fall to th’ argument.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth Hudibras, Friend Ralph, thou hast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Out-run the constable at last:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For thou art fallen on a new</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dispute, as senseless as untrue,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But to the former opposite</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And contrary as black to white;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mere disparata;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-82" id="noteref-82" epub:type="noteref">82</a> that concerning</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Presbytery; this, human learning;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Two things s’ averse, they never yet</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But in thy rambling fancy met.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But I shall take a fit occasion</span>
						<br/>
						<span>T’ evince thee by ratiocination,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some other time, in place more proper</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than this we’re in; therefore let’s stop here,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And rest our weary’d bones a while,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Already tir’d with other toil.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
