<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="canto-1-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<div epub:type="bridgehead z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>The catalogue and character</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of th’ enemies best men of war;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom, in bold harangue, the Knight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Defies, and challenges to fight.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>H’ encounters Talgol, routs the Bear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And takes the Fiddler prisoner,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Conveys him to enchanted castle;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There shuts him fast in wooden bastile.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>There was an ancient sage philosopher,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That had read Alexander Ross over,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swore the world, as he could prove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was made of fighting and of love:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just so Romances are, for what else</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is in them all, but love and battles?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ th’ first of these we’ve no great matter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To treat of, but a world o’ th’ latter;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which to do the injur’d right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We mean, in what concerns just fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Certes our authors are to blame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For to make some well-sounding name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pattern fit for modern knights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To copy out in frays and fights;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like those that a whole street do raze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To build a palace in the place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They never care how many others</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They kill, without regard of mothers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or wives, or children, so they can</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make up some fierce, dead-doing man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Compos’d of many ingredient valours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just like the manhood of nine tailors.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So a wild Tartar, when he spies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man that’s handsome, valiant, wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If he can kill him, thinks t’ inherit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His wit, his beauty, and his spirit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if just so much he enjoy’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in another is destroy’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For when a giant’s slain in fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mow’d o’erthwart, or cleft downright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is a heavy case, no doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man should have his brains beat out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because he’s tall, and has large bones;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As men kill beavers for their stones.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But as for our part, we shall tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The naked truth of what befel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as an equal friend to both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Knight and Bear, but more to troth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With neither faction shall take part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But give to each his due desert;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never coin a formal lie on’t,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make the Knight o’ercome the giant.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This b’ing profest, we’ve hopes enough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now go on where we left off.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They rode; but authors having not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Determin’d whether pace or trot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(That is to say, whether tollutation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As they do term’t, or succussation,)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-51" id="noteref-51" epub:type="noteref">51</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>We leave it, and go on, as now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suppose they did, no matter how;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet some from subtle hints have got</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mysterious light, it was a trot:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But let that pass: they now begun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To spur their living engines on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For as whipp’d tops, and bandy’d balls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The learned hold, are animals;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So horses they affirm to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mere engines made by geometry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And were invented first from engines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Indian Britons were from Penguins.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-52" id="noteref-52" epub:type="noteref">52</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>So let them be; and, as I was saying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They their live engines ply’d, not staying</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until they reach’d the fatal champaign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which th’ enemy did then encamp on;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dire Pharsalian plain, where battle<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-53" id="noteref-53" epub:type="noteref">53</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was to be wag’d ’twixt puissant cattle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fierce auxiliary men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That came to aid their brethren,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who now began to take the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Knight from ridge of steed beheld.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For as our modern wits behold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mounted a pick-back on the old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much further oft; much further he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rais’d on his aged beast could see;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet not sufficient to descry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All postures of the enemy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore he bids the Squire ride further,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>T’ observe their numbers, and their order;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That when their motions he had known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He might know how to fit his own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile he stopp’d his willing steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fit himself for martial deed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both kinds of metal he prepar’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Either to give blows, or to ward:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Courage and steel, both of great force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prepar’d for better or for worse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His death-charg’d pistols he did fit well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drawn out from life-preserving vittle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These being prim’d, with force he labour’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To free ’s sword from retentive scabbard;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, after many a painful pluck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From rusty durance he bail’d tuck.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then shook himself, to see that prowess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In scabbard of his arms sat loose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, rais’d upon his desp’rate foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On stirrup-side he gaz’d about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Portending blood, like blazing star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beacon of approaching war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ralpho rode on with no less speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than Hugo in the forest did;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But far more in returning made;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now the foe he had survey’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rang’d as to him they did appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With van, main battle, wings, and rear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ the head of all this warlike rabble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crowdero march’d, expert and able.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instead of trumpet and of drum,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That makes the warrior’s stomach come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose noise whets valour sharp, like beer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By thunder turn’d to vinegar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(For if a trumpet sound, or drum beat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who has not a month’s mind to combat?)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A squeaking engine he apply’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto his neck, on north-east side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just where the hangman does dispose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To special friends, the knot of noose:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ’tis great grace, when statesmen straight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dispatch a friend, let others wait.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His warped ear hung o’er the strings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which was but souse to chitterlings:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For guts, some write, ere they are sodden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are fit for music, or for pudden;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From whence men borrow ev’ry kind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of minstrelsy by string or wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His grisly beard was long and thick,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With which he strung his fiddle-stick;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he to horse-tail scorn’d to owe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For what on his own chin did grow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chiron,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-54" id="noteref-54" epub:type="noteref">54</a> the four-legg’d bard, had both</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A beard and tail of his own growth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet by authors ’tis averr’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He made use only of his beard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Staffordshire, where virtuous worth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does raise the minstrelsy, not birth;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-55" id="noteref-55" epub:type="noteref">55</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where bulls do choose the boldest king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ruler, o’er the men of string;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(As once in Persia, ’tis said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kings were proclaim’d by a horse that neigh’d;)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bravely venturing at a crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By chance of war was beaten down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wounded sore. His leg then broke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had got a deputy of oak:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For when a shin in fight is cropp’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The knee with one of timber’s propp’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Esteem’d more honourable than the other,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And takes place, though the younger brother.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Next march’d brave Orsin, famous for</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wise conduct, and success in war:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A skilful leader, stout, severe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now marshal to the champion bear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With truncheon, tipp’d with iron head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warrior to the lists he led;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With solemn march and stately pace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But far more grave and solemn face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grave as the Emperor of Pegu<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-56" id="noteref-56" epub:type="noteref">56</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or Spanish Potentate, Don Diego.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This leader was of knowledge great,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Either for charge or for retreat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knew when to fall on pell-mell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fall back and retreat as well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So lawyers, lest the bear defendant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plaintiff dog, should make an end on’t,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do stave and tail with writs of error,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reverse of judgment, and demurrer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To let them breathe a while, and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cry whoop, and set them on agen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Romulus a wolf did rear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So he was dry-nurs’d by a bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That fed him with the purchas’d prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of many a fierce and bloody fray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bred up, where discipline most rare is,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In military Garden Paris.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-57" id="noteref-57" epub:type="noteref">57</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For soldiers heretofore did grow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In gardens just as weeds do now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until some splay-foot politicians</span>
				<br/>
				<span>T’ Apollo offer’d up petitions</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For licensing a new invention</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They’d found out of an antique engine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To root out all the weeds that grow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In public gardens at a blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leave th’ herbs standing. Quoth Sir Sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My friends, that is not to be done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not done! quoth Statesmen; yes, an’t please ye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When it’s once known, you’ll say ’tis easy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why then let’s know it, quoth Apollo.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’ll beat a drum, and they’ll all follow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A drum! (quoth Phoebus;) troth, that’s true;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pretty invention, quaint and new.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But though of voice and instrument</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We are the undoubted president,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We such loud music don’t profess:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The devil’s master of that office,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where it must pass, if ’t be a drum;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’ll sign it with <abbr>Cler.</abbr> <abbr>Parl.</abbr> <abbr>Dom.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">Com.</abbr></span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him apply yourselves, and he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will soon dispatch you for his fee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They did so; but it prov’d so ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Th’ had better let ’em grow there still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But to resume what we discoursing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were on before, that is, stout Orsin:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That which so oft, by sundry writers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has been applied t’ almost all fighters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More justly may b’ ascrib’d to this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than any other warrior, (<abbr>viz.</abbr>)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None ever acted both parts bolder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both of a chieftain and a soldier.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was of great descent, and high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For splendour and antiquity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from celestial origine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deriv’d himself in a right line:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not as the ancient heroes did,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, that their base births might be hid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Knowing they were of doubtful gender,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that they came in at a windore,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made Jupiter himself, and others</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ th’ gods, gallants to their own mothers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To get on them a race of champions</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Of which old Homer first made lampoons.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arctophylax, in northern sphere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was his undoubted ancestor:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From him his great forefathers came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in all ages bore his name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learned he was in med’c’nal lore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For by his side a pouch he wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Replete with strange hermetic powder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wounds nine miles point-blank would solder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By skilful chemist, with great cost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Extracted from a rotten post;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But of a heav’nlier influence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than that which mountebanks dispense;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though by Promethean fire made,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-58" id="noteref-58" epub:type="noteref">58</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>As they do quack that drive that trade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For as when slovens do amiss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At others doors, by stool or piss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The learned write, a red-hot spit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>B’ing prudently apply’d to it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will convey mischief from the dung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the part that did the wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So this did healing; and as sure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As that did mischief, this could cure.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus virtuous Orsin was endu’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With learning, conduct, fortitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Incomparable: and as the prince</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of poets, Homer, sung long since,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A skilful leech is better far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than half an hundred men of war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So he appear’d; and by his skill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No less than dint of sword, could kill.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The gallant Bruin march’d next him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With visage formidably grim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rugged as a Saracen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or Turk of Mahomet’s own kin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clad in a mantle <i xml:lang="it">della guerre</i></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of rough impenetrable fur;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in his nose, like Indian king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wore, for ornament, a ring;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About his neck a threefold gorget,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As rough as trebled leathern target;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armed, as heralds, cant, and langued;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, as the vulgar say, sharp-fanged.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For as the teeth in beasts of prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are swords, with which they fight in fray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So swords, in men of war, are teeth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which they do eat their vittle with.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was by birth, some authors write,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Russian; some, a Muscovite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ’mong the Cossacks had been bred,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-59" id="noteref-59" epub:type="noteref">59</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of whom we in diurnals read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That serve to fill up pages here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As with their bodies ditches there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scrimansky was his cousin-german,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With whom he serv’d, and fed on vermin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when these fail’d, he’d suck his claws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quarter himself upon his paws.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though his countrymen, the Huns,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-60" id="noteref-60" epub:type="noteref">60</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did stew their meat between their bums</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And th’ horses backs o’er which they straddle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ev’ry man eat up his saddle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was not half so nice as they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But eat it raw when ’t came in’s way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had trac’d countries far and near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More than Le Blanc, the traveller;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who writes, he spous’d in India,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of noble house, a lady gay,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-61" id="noteref-61" epub:type="noteref">61</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And got on her a race of worthies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As stout as any upon earth is.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full many a fight for him between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Talgol and Orsin oft had been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each striving to deserve the crown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a sav’d citizen; the one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To guard his bear; the other fought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To aid his dog; both made more stout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By sev’ral spurs of neighbourhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Church-fellow-membership, and blood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Talgol, mortal foe to cows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never got aught of him but blows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blows hard and heavy, such as he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had lent, repaid with usury.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet Talgol was of courage stout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vanquish’d oft’ner than he fought:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inur’d to labour, sweat and toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And like a champion shone with oil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right many a widow his keen blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many fatherless had made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He many a boar and huge dun-cow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did, like another Guy, o’erthrow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Guy with him in fight compar’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had like the boar or dun-cow far’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With greater troops of sheep h’ had fought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than Ajax or bold Don Quixote:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a serpent of fell kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wings before and stings behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Subdu’d, as poets say, long agone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bold Sir George, <abbr>St.</abbr> George, did the dragon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor engine, nor device polemic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disease, nor doctor epidemic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though stor’d with deletory med’cines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Which whosoever took is dead since,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>E’er sent so vast a colony</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To both the underworlds as he:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he was of that noble trade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That demi-gods and heroes made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slaughter and knocking on the head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trade to which they all were bred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And is, like others, glorious when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis great and large, but base if mean:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The former rides in triumph for it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The latter in a two-wheel’d chariot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For daring to profane a thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So sacred with vile bungling.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Next these the brave Magnano came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Magnano, great in martial fame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet when with Orsin he wag’d fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis sung, he got but little by ’t.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet he was fierce as forest boar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose spoils upon his back he wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thick as Ajax’ seven-fold shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which o’er his brazen arms he held:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But brass was feeble to resist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fury of his armed fist;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor could the hardest ir’n hold out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against his blows, but they would through’t.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In magic he was deeply read</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he that made the brazen head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Profoundly skill’d in the black art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As English Merlin for his heart;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-62" id="noteref-62" epub:type="noteref">62</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>But far more skilful in the spheres</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than he was at the sieve and shears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He could transform himself in colour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As like the devil as a collier;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As like as hypocrites in show</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are to true saints, or crow to crow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of warlike engines he was author,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Devis’d for quick dispatch of slaughter:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cannon, blunderbuss, and saker,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was th’ inventor of, and maker:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trumpet, and the kettle-drum,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did both from his invention come.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was the first that e’er did teach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make, and how to stop, a breach.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lance he bore with iron pike;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Th’ one half would thrust, the other strike;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when their forces he had join’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He scorn’d to turn his parts behind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He Trulla lov’d; Trulla, more bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than burnish’d armour of her knight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bold virago, stout and tall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Joan of France, or English Mall,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-63" id="noteref-63" epub:type="noteref">63</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thro’ perils both of wind and limb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thro’ thick and thin, she follow’d him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ev’ry adventure h’ undertook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never him or it forsook:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At breach of wall, or hedge surprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She shar’d i’ th’ hazard and the prize:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At beating quarters up, or forage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behav’d herself with matchless courage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laid about in fight more busily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the Amazonian dame Penthesile.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-64" id="noteref-64" epub:type="noteref">64</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And though some critics here cry shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And say our authors are to blame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That (spite of all philosophers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who hold no females stout but bears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heretofore did so abhor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That women should pretend to war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They would not suffer the stoutest dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To swear by Hercules’s name)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-65" id="noteref-65" epub:type="noteref">65</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make feeble ladies in their works,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fight like termagants and Turks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lay their native arms aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their modesty, and ride astride;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To run a-tilt at men, and wield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their naked tools in open field;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As stout Armida, bold Thalestris,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-66" id="noteref-66" epub:type="noteref">66</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she that would have been the mistress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Gondibert;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-67" id="noteref-67" epub:type="noteref">67</a> but he had grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rather took a country lass;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They say, ’tis false, without all sense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But of pernicious consequence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To government, which they suppose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can never be upheld in prose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strip Nature naked to the skin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’ll find about her no such thing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It may be so; yet what we tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Trulla that’s improbable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall be depos’d by those who’ve seen’t,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, what’s as good, produc’d in print:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if they will not take our word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’ll prove it true upon record.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The upright Cerdon next advanc’t,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all his race the valiant’st:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cerdon the Great, renown’d in song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like Herc’les, for repair of wrong:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rais’d the low and fortify’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weak against the strongest side:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ill has he read, that never hit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On him in Muses’ deathless writ.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had a weapon keen and fierce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That through a bull-hide shield would pierce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cut it in a thousand pieces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though tougher than the Knight of Greece his,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With whom his black-thumb’d ancestor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was comrade in the ten years war:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For when the restless Greeks sat down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many years before Troy town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And were renown’d, as Homer writes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For well sol’d boots no less than fights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They ow’d that glory only to</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His ancestor, that made them so.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fast friend he was to Reformation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until ’twas worn quite out of fashion.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next rectifier of wry law,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And would make three to cure one flaw.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learned he was, and could take note,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Transcribe, collect, translate, and quote.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But preaching was his chiefest talent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or argument, in which b’ing valiant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He us’d to lay about and stickle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like ram or bull, at conventicle:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For disputants, like rams and bulls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do fight with arms that spring from skulls.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Last Colon came, bold man of war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Destin’d to blows by fatal star;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right expert in command of horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But cruel, and without remorse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That which of Centaur long ago</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was said, and has been wrested to</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some other knights, was true of this;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He and his horse were of a piece.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One spirit did inform them both;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The self-same vigour, fury, wroth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet he was much the rougher part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And always had a harder heart:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although his horse had been of those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That fed on man’s flesh, as fame goes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strange food for horse! and yet, alas!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It may be true, for flesh is grass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sturdy he was, and no less able</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than Hercules to clean a stable;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As great a drover, and as great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A critic too, in hog or neat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He ripp’d the womb up of his mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dame Tellus, ’cause she wanted fother</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And provender wherewith to feed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself, and his less cruel steed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was a question, whether he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or ’s horse were of a family</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More worshipful: ’till antiquaries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(After th’ had almost por’d out their eyes)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did very learnedly decide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The business on the horse’s side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prov’d not only horse, but cows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, pigs, were of the elder house:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For beasts, when man was but a piece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of earth himself, did th’ earth possess.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>These worthies were the chief that led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The combatants, each in the head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his command, with arms and rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ready and longing to engage.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The numerous rabble was drawn out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sev’ral counties round about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From villages remote, and shires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of east and western hemispheres:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From foreign parishes and regions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of different manners, speech, religions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came men and mastiffs; some to fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For fame and honour, some for sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the field of death, the lists,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were enter’d by antagonists,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blood was ready to be broach’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Hudibras in haste approach’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Squire and weapons, to attack ’em;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But first thus from his horse bespake ’em:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What rage, O citizens! what fury</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth you to these dire actions hurry?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What oestrum, what phrenetic mood,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-68" id="noteref-68" epub:type="noteref">68</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes you thus lavish of your blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the proud Vies your trophies boast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And unreveng’d walks⁠—ghost?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What towns, what garrisons might you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With hazard of this blood subdue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which now y’ are bent to throw away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain, untriumphable fray!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall saints in civil bloodshed wallow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of saints, and let the Cause lie fallow?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cause for which we fought and swore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So boldly, shall we now give o’er?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, because quarrels still are seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With oaths and swearings to begin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The solemn League and Covenant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will seem a mere God-dam-me rant;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we, that took it, and have fought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As lewd as drunkards that fall out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For as we make war for the king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against himself, the self-same thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some will not stick to swear, we do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For God and for religion too:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For if bear-baiting we allow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What good can Reformation do?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blood and treasure that’s laid out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is thrown away, and goes for nought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are these the fruits o’ th’ Protestation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Prototype of Reformation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which all the Saints, and some, since martyrs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wore in their hats like wedding garters,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-69" id="noteref-69" epub:type="noteref">69</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>When ’twas resolv’d by either House</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Six Members quarrel to espouse?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-70" id="noteref-70" epub:type="noteref">70</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did they for this draw down the rabble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With zeal and noises formidable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make all cries about the town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Join throats to cry the bishops down?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who having round begirt the palace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(As once a month they do the gallows,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As members gave the sign about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set up their throats with hideous shout.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When tinkers bawl’d aloud to settle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Church discipline, for patching kettle:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No sow-gelder did blow his horn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To geld a cat, but cry’d Reform.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The oyster-women lock’d their fish up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And trudg’d away, to cry, No bishop.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mouse-trap men laid save-alls by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ’gainst ev’l counsellors did cry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bothers left old clothes in the lurch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fell to turn and patch the Church.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some cry’d the Covenant instead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of pudding-pies and ginger-bread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some for brooms, old boots and shoes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bawl’d out to purge the Commons’ House.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instead of kitchen-stuff, some cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A gospel-preaching ministry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some, for old suits, coats, or cloak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No Surplices nor Service-Book.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A strange harmonious inclination</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all degrees to Reformation.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And is this all? Is this the end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To which these carr’ings on did tend?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath public faith, like a young heir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this ta’en up all sorts of ware,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And run int’ every tradesman’s book,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till both turn’d bankrupts, and are broke?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did Saints for this bring in their plate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crowd as if they came too late?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For when they thought the Cause had need on’t,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy was he that could be rid on’t.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did they coin piss-pots, bowls, and flagons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Int’ officers of horse and dragoons;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And into pikes and musqueteers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stamp beakers, cups, and porringers?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thimble, bodkin, and a spoon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did start up living men as soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in the furnace they were thrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just like the dragon’s teeth b’ing sown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then was the Cause of gold and plate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brethren’s off’rings, consecrate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like th’ Hebrew calf, and down before it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The saints fell prostrate, to adore it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So say the wicked⁠—and will you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make that sarcasmus scandal true,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-71" id="noteref-71" epub:type="noteref">71</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>By running after dogs and bears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beasts more unclean than calves or steers?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have pow’rful preachers ply’d their tongues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laid themselves out and their lungs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Us’d all means, both direct and sinister,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ th’ pow’r of gospel-preaching minister?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have they invented tones to win</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The women, and make them draw in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The men, as Indians with a female</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tame elephant inveigle the male?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have they told Prov’dence what it must do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom to avoid, and whom to trust to?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Discover’d th’ enemy’s design,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And which way best to countermine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prescrib’d what ways it hath to work,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or it will ne’er advance the kirk?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Told it the news o’ th’ last express,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after good or bad success,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made prayers, not so like petitions</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As overtures and propositions</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Such as the army did present</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To their creator, th’ Parliament,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which they freely will confess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They will not, cannot, acquiesce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unless the work be carry’d on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the same way they have begun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By setting church and common-weal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All on a flame, bright as their zeal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On which the saints were all agog,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all this for a bear and dog?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The parliament drew up petitions</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ’tself, and sent them, like commissions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To well-affected persons down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ev’ry city and great town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pow’r to levy horse and men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only to bring them back agen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this did many, many a mile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ride manfully in rank and file,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With papers in their hats, that show’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if they to the pillory rode.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have all these courses, these efforts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Been try’d by people of all sorts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>
					<i xml:lang="la">Velis et remis, omnibus nervis,</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all t’ advance the Cause’s service?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shall all now be thrown, away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In petulant intestine fray?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall we that in the Cov’nant swore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each man of us to run before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another, still in Reformation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give dogs and bears a dispensation?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How will Dissenting Brethren relish it?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What will malignants say? videlicet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That each man swore to do his best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To damn and perjure all the rest!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bid the Devil take the hin’most,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which at this race is like to win most.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They’ll say our bus’ness, to reform</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The church and state, is but a worm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For to subscribe, unsight, unseen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To an unknown church-discipline,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What is it else, but before-hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>T’ engage, and after understand?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For when we swore to carry on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The present Reformation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>According to the purest mode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Churches best reform’d abroad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What did we else, but make a vow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do we know not what, nor how?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For no three of us will agree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where or what churches these should be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And is indeed the self-same case</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With theirs that swore et ceteras:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-72" id="noteref-72" epub:type="noteref">72</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the French League, in which men vow’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fight to the last drop of blood.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-73" id="noteref-73" epub:type="noteref">73</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>These slanders will be thrown upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cause and work we carry on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If we permit men to run headlong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>T’ exorbitances fit for bedlam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rather than gospel-walking times,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When slightest sins are greatest crimes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we the matter so shall handle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As to remove that odious scandal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In name of King and Parliament,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I charge ye all no more foment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This feud, but keep the peace between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your brethren and your countrymen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to those places straight repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where your respective dwellings are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But to that purpose first surrender</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Fiddler, as the prime offender,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Th’ incendiary vile, that is chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Author and engineer of mischief;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That makes division between friends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For profane and malignant ends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He, and that engine of vile noise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On which illegally he plays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall (<i xml:lang="la">dictum factum</i>) both be brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To condign punishment, as they ought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This must be done; and I would fain see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mortal so sturdy as to gainsay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For then I’ll take another course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And soon reduce you all by force.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This said, he clapp’d his hand on sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shew he meant to keep his word.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Talgol, who had long supprest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inflamed wrath in glowing breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which now began to rage and burn as</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Implacably as flame in furnace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus answer’d him:⁠—Thou vermin wretched</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As e’er in measled pork was hatched;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou tail of worship, that dost grow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On rump of justice as of cow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How dar’st thou, with that sullen luggage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ th’ self, old ir’n, and other baggage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With which thy steed of bones and leather</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has broke his wind in halting hither;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How durst th’, I say, adventure thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>T’ oppose thy lumber against us?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could thine impertinence find out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To work t’ employ itself about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where thou, secure from wooden blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy busy vanity might’st show?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was no dispute a-foot between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The caterwauling brethren?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No subtle question rais’d among</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those out-o’-their wits, and those i’ th’ wrong?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No prize between those combatants</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ th’ times, the land and water saints;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where thou might’st strickle without hazard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of outrage to thy hide and mazzard;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not for want of bus’ness come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To us to be so troublesome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To interrupt our better sort</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of disputants, and spoil our sport?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was there no felony, no bawd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut-purse, no burglary abroad;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No stolen pig, nor plunder’d goose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tie thee up from breaking loose?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No ale unlicens’d, broken hedge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For which thou statute might’st alledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep thee busy from foul evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shame due to thee from the devil?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did no committee sit, where he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might cut out journey-work for thee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And set th’ a task, with subornation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stitch up sale and sequestration;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cheat, with holiness and zeal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All parties, and the common weal?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much better had it been for thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>H’ had kept thee where th’ art us’d to be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or sent th’ on bus’ness any whither,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So he had never brought thee hither.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if th’ hast brain enough in skull</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep itself in lodging whole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not provoke the rage of stones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cudgels to thy hide and bones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tremble, and vanish, while thou may’st,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which I’ll not promise if thou stay’st.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At this the Knight grew high in wroth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lifting hands and eyes up both,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three times he smote on stomach stout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From whence at length these words broke out:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Was I for this entitled Sir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And girt with trusty sword and spur,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For fame and honour to wage battle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to be brav’d by foe to cattle?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not all that pride that makes thee swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As big as thou dost blown-up veal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor all thy tricks and sleights to cheat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sell thy carrion for good meat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not all thy magic to repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decay’d old age in tough lean ware;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make nat’ral appear thy work,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stop the gangrene in stale pork;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not all that force that makes thee proud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because by bullock ne’er withstood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though arm’d with all thy cleavers, knives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And axes made to hew down lives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall save or help thee to evade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hand of Justice, or this blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which I, her sword-bearer, do carry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For civil deed and military.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor shall those words of venom base,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which thou hast from their native place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy stomach pump’d to fling on me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go unreveng’d, though I am free:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou down the same throat shalt devour ’em,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like tainted beef, and pay dear for ’em.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor shall it e’er be said, that wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With gantlet blue, and bases white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And round blunt truncheon by his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So great a man at arms defy’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With words far bitterer than wormwood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That would in Job or Grizel stir mood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dogs with their tongues their wounds do heal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But men with hands, as thou shalt feel.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This said, with hasty rage he snatch’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His gun-shot, that in holsters watch’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bending cock, he levell’d full</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against th’ outside of Talgol’s skull;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vowing that he should ne’er stir further,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor henceforth cow nor bullock murther.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Pallas came in shape of rust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ’twixt the spring and hammer thrust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her Gorgon shield, which made the cock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand stiff, as ’twere transform’d to stock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile fierce Talgol, gath’ring might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With rugged truncheon charg’d the Knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he with petronel upheav’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instead of shield, the blow receiv’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gun recoil’d, as well it might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not us’d to such a kind of fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shrunk from its great master’s gripe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knock’d down and stunn’d by mortal stripe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Hudibras, with furious haste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew out his sword; yet not so fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Talgol first, with hardy thwack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twice bruis’d his head, and twice his back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when his nut-brown sword was out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With stomach huge he laid about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imprinting many a wound upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His mortal foe, the truncheon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trusty cudgel did oppose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Itself against dead-doing blows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To guard its leader from fell bane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then reveng’d itself again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though the sword (some understood)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In force had much the odds of wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas nothing so; both sides were balanc’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So equal, none knew which was valiant’st:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For wood with Honour b’ing engag’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is so implacably enrag’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though iron hew and mangle sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wood wounds and bruises honour more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now both knights were out of breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tir’d in the hot pursuit of death;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While all the rest amaz’d stood still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Expecting which should take or kill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Hudibras observ’d; and fretting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conquest should be so long a getting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He drew up all his force into</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One body, and that into one blow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Talgol wisely avoided it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By cunning sleight; for had it hit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The upper part of him the blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had slit as sure as that below.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meanwhile th’ incomparable Colon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To aid his friend, began to fall on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him Ralph encounter’d, and straight grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dismal combat ’twixt them two:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Th’ one arm’d with metal, th’ other with wood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This fit for bruise, and that for blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With many a stiff thwack, many a bang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard crab-tree and old iron rang;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While none that saw them could divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To which side conquest would incline,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until Magnano, who did envy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That two should with so many men vie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By subtle stratagem of brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perform’d what force could ne’er attain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he, by foul hap, having found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where thistles grew on barren ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In haste he drew his weapon out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And having cropp’d them from the root,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He clapp’d them underneath the tail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of steed, with pricks as sharp as nail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The angry beast did straight resent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wrong done to his fundament;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began to kick, and fling, and wince,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if h’ had been beside his sense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Striving to disengage from thistle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That gall’d him sorely under his tail:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instead of which, he threw the pack</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Squire and baggage from his back;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blund’ring still with smarting rump,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gave the Knight’s steed such a thump</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As made him reel. The Knight did stoop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sat on further side aslope.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Talgol viewing, who had now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By sleight escap’d the fatal blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rally’d, and again fell to’t;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For catching foe by nearer foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lifted with such might and strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As would have hurl’d him thrice his length,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dash’d his brains (if any) out:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Mars, that still protects the stout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In pudding-time came to his aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And under him the bear convey’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bear, upon whose soft fur-gown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Knight with all his weight fell down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The friendly rug preserv’d the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And headlong Knight, from bruise or wound:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like feather-bed betwixt a wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heavy brunt of cannon-ball.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Sancho on a blanket fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And had no hurt, ours far’d as well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In body; though his mighty spirit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>B’ing heavy, did not so well bear it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bear was in a greater fright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beat down and worsted by the Knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He roar’d, and rag’d, and flung about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shake off bondage from his snout.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His wrath inflam’d, boil’d o’er, and from</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His jaws of death he threw the foam:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fury in stranger postures threw him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And more than herald ever drew him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He tore the earth which he had sav’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From squelch of Knight, and storm’d and rav’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vext the more because the harms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He felt were ’gainst the law of arms:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For men he always took to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His friends, and dogs the enemy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who never so much hurt had done him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As his own side did falling on him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It griev’d him to the guts that they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For whom h’ had fought so many a fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And serv’d with loss of blood so long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shou’d offer such inhuman wrong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrong of unsoldier-like condition:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For which he flung down his commission;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And laid about him, till his nose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From thrall of ring and cord broke loose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon as he felt himself enlarg’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through thickest of his foes he charg’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made way through th’ amazed crew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some he o’erran, and some o’erthrew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But took none; for by hasty flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He strove t’ escape pursuit of Knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From whom he fled with as much haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dread as he the rabble chas’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In haste he fled, and so did they;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each and his fear a several way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Crowdero only kept the field;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not stirring from the place he held,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though beaten down and wounded sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ th’ fiddle, and a leg that bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One side of him; not that of bone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But much its better, th’ wooden one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spying Hudibras lie strow’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the ground, like log of wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fright of fall, supposed wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And loss of urine, in a swound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In haste he snatch’d the wooden limb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hurt i’ th’ ankle lay by him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fitting it for sudden fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straight drew it up t’ attack the Knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For getting up on stump and huckle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He with the foe began to buckle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vowing to be reveng’d for breach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of crowd and skin upon the wretch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sole author of all detriment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He and his fiddle underwent.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Ralpho (who had now begun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>T’ adventure resurrection</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From heavy squelch, and had got up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his legs, with sprained crup)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looking about, beheld pernicion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Approaching Knight from fell musician.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He snatch’d his whinyard up, that fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he was falling off his steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(As rats do from a falling house,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hide itself from rage of blows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, wing’d with speed and fury, flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rescue Knight from black and blue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, e’er he could achieve, his sconce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The leg encounter’d twice and once;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now ’twas rais’d to smite agen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Ralpho thrust himself between.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He took the blow upon his arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shield the Knight from further harm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, joining wrath with force, bestow’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On th’ wooden member such a load,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That down it fell, and with it bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crowdero, whom it propp’d before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him the Squire right nimbly run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And setting conquering foot upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His trunk, thus spoke: What desp’rate frenzy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made thee (thou whelp of sin!) to fancy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thyself, and all that coward rabble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>T’ encounter us in battle able?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How durst th’, I say, oppose thy curship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Gainst arms, authority, and worship?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hudibras or me provoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though all thy limbs, were heart of oak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And th’ other half of thee as good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear out blows, as that of wood?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could not the whipping-post prevail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all its rhet’ric, nor the jail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep from flaying scourge thy skin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ankle free from iron gin?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which now thou shalt⁠—But first our care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must see how Hudibras doth fare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This said, he gently rais’d the Knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And set him on his bum upright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rouse him from lethargic dump,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He tweak’d his nose; with gentle thump</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knock’d on his breast, as if ’t had been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To raise the spirits lodg’d within.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They, waken’d with the noise, did fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From inward room to window eye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gently op’ning lid, the casement,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look’d out, but yet with some amazement.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This gladded Ralpho much to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who thus bespoke the Knight: quoth he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tweaking his nose, You are, great Sir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A self-denying conqueror;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As high, victorious, and great,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As e’er fought for the churches yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If you will give yourself but leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make out what y’ already have;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That’s victory. The foe, for dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of your nine-worthiness, is fled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All, save Crowdero, for whose sake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You did th’ espous’d cause undertake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he lies pris’ner at your feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be dispos’d as you think meet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Either for life, or death, or sale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gallows, or perpetual jail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For one wink of your powerful eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must sentence him to live or die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fiddle is your proper purchase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Won in the service of the churches;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by your doom must be allow’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be, or be no more, a crowd.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For though success did not confer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just title on the conqueror;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though dispensations were not strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conclusions, whether right or wrong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although out-goings did confirm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And owning were but a mere term;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet as the wicked have no right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To th’ creature, though usurp’d by might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The property is in the saint,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From whom th’ injuriously detain ’t;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of him they hold their luxuries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their dogs, their horses, whores, and dice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their riots, revels, masks, delights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pimps, buffoons, fiddlers, parasites;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All which the saints have title to,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ought t’ enjoy, if th’ had their due.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What we take from them is no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than what was our’s by right before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For we are their true landlords still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they our tenants but at will.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At this the Knight began to rouse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by degrees grow valorous,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He star’d about, and seeing none</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all his foes remain but one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He snatch’d his weapon, that lay near him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the ground began to rear him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vowing to make Crowdero pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all the rest that ran away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Ralpho now, in colder blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fury mildly thus withstood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great Sir, quoth he, your mighty spirit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is rais’d too high: this slave does merit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be the hangman’s business, sooner</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than from your hand to have the honour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his destruction. I, that am</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A nothingness in deed and name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did scorn to hurt his forfeit carcass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or ill intreat his fiddle or case:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will you, great Sir, that glory blot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In cold blood which you gain’d in hot?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will you employ your conqu’ring sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To break a fiddle and your word?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For though I fought, and overcame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quarter gave, ’twas in your name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For great commanders only own</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What’s prosperous by the soldier done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To save, where you have pow’r to kill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Argues your pow’r above your will;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that your will and pow’r have less</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than both might have of selfishness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This pow’r which, now alive, with dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He trembles at, if he were dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would no more keep the slave in awe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than if you were a knight of straw:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For death would then be his conqueror;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not you, and free him from that terror.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If danger from his life accrue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or honour from his death, to you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twere policy, and honour too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do as you resolv’d to do;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, Sir, ’twould wrong your valour much,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To say it needs or fears a crutch.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great conquerors greater glory gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By foes in triumph led, than slain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The laurels that adorn their brows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are pull’d from living not dead boughs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And living foes: the greatest fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of cripple slain can be but lame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One half of him’s already slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other is not worth your pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Th’ honour can but on one side light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As worship did, when y’ were dubb’d knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore I think it better far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep him prisoner of war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let him fast in bonds abide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At court of justice to be try’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where, if he appear so bold and crafty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There may be danger in his safety.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If any member there dislike</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His face, or to his beard have pique;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or if his death will save or yield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revenge or fright, it is reveal’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though he has quarter, ne’er the less</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Y’ have power to hang him when you please.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This has been often done by some</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our great conqu’rors, you know whom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And has by most of us been held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wise Justice, and to some reveal’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For words and promises, that yoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The conqueror, are quickly broke;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like Samson’s cuffs, though by his own</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Direction and advice put on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For if we should fight for the Cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By rules of military laws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And only do what they call just,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cause would quickly fall to dust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This we among ourselves may speak;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But to the wicked, or the weak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We must be cautious to declare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perfection-truths, such as these are.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This said, the high outrageous mettle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Knight began to cool and settle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He lik’d the Squire’s advice, and soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resolv’d to see the business done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therefore charg’d him first to bind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crowdero’s hands on rump behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to its former place and use</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wooden member to reduce;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But force it take an oath before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ne’er to bear arms against him more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ralpho dispatched with speedy haste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And having ty’d Crowdero fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gave Sir Knight the end of cord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lead the captive of his sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In triumph, whilst the steeds he caught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And them to further service brought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Squire in state rode on before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on his nut-brown whinyard bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trophy-fiddle and the case,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaning on shoulder like a mace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Knight himself did after ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leading Crowdero by his side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tow’d him, if he lagg’d behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like boat against the tide and wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus grave and solemn they march’d on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until quite thro’ the town th’ had gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At further end of which there stands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An ancient castle, that commands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Th’ adjacent parts: in all the fabric</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You shall not see one stone nor a brick:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all of wood; by pow’rful spell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of magic made impregnable.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s neither iron-bar nor gate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Portcullis, chain, nor bolt, nor grate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet men durance there abide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In dungeon scarce three inches wide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With roof so low, that under it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They never stand, but lie or sit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet so foul, that whoso ’s in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is to the middle-leg in prison;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In circle magical confin’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With walls of subtle air and wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which none are able to break thorough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until they’re freed by head of borough.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thither arriv’d, th’ advent’rous Knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bold Squire from their steeds alight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At th’ outward wall, near which there stands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bastile, built to imprison hands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By strange enchantment made to fetter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lesser parts and free the greater;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For though the body may creep through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hands in grate are fast enough:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when a circle ’bout the wrist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is made by beadle exorcist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The body feels the spur and switch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if ’twere ridden post by witch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At twenty miles an hour pace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet ne’er stirs out of the place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On top of this there is a spire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On which Sir Knight first bids the Squire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fiddle and its spoils, the case,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In manner of a trophy place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That done, they ope the trap-door gate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let Crowdero down thereat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crowdero making doleful face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like hermit poor in pensive place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To dungeon they the wretch commit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the survivor of his feet:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But th’ other, that had broke the peace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And head of knighthood, they release;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though a delinquent false and forged,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, being a stranger he’s enlarged,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While his comrade, that did no hurt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is clapp’d up fast in prison for’t.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Justice, while she winks at crimes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stumbles on innocence sometimes.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
