<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="canto-2-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<div epub:type="bridgehead z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>The Knight, by damnable magician,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Being cast illegally in prison,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Love brings his action on the case.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And lays it upon Hudibras.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How he receives the Lady’s visit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And cunningly solicits his suit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which she defers; yet on parole</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Redeems him from th’ enchanted hole.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>But now, t’ observe a romantic method,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-83" id="noteref-83" epub:type="noteref">83</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let bloody steel awhile be sheathed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all those harsh and rugged sounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bastinadoes, cuts, and wounds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exchang’d to Love’s more gentle style,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To let our reader breathe a while:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which, that we may be as brief as</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is possible, by way of preface,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is’t not enough to make one strange,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That some men’s fancies should ne’er change,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But make all people do and say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The same things still the self-same way?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some writers make all ladies purloin’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knights pursuing like a whirlwind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Others make all their knights, in fits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of jealousy, to lose their wits;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till drawing blood o’ th’ dames, like witches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Th’ are forthwith cur’d of their capriches.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some always thrive in their amours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By pulling plaisters off their sores:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As cripples do to get an alms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just so do they, and win their dames.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some force whole regions, in despite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’ geography, to change their site;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make former times shake hands with latter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that which was before, come after.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But those that write in rhyme, still make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The one verse for the other’s sake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For one for sense, and one for rhyme,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I think’s sufficient at one time.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But we forget in what sad plight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We whilom left the captiv’d Knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pensive Squire, both bruis’d in body,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And conjur’d into safe custody.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tir’d with dispute and speaking Latin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As well as basting and bear-baiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And desperate of any course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To free himself by wit or force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His only solace was, that now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His dog-bolt fortune was so low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That either it must quickly end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or turn about again, and mend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which he found th’ event, no less</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than other times, beside his guess.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There is a tall long-sided dame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(But wondrous light,) ycleped Fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, like a thin cameleon, boards</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herself on air, and eats her words;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon her shoulders wings she wears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like hanging-sleeves lin’d through with ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eyes, and tongues, as poets list,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made good by deep mythologist:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With these she through the welkin flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sometimes carries truth, oft lies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With letters hung, like eastern pigeons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mercuries of farthest regions;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Diurnals writ for regulation</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lying, to inform the nation;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by their public use to bring down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rate of whetstones in the kingdom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About her neck a pacquet-male,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fraught with advice, some fresh, some stale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men that walk’d when they were dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cows of monsters brought to bed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hail-stones big as pullets’ eggs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And puppies whelp’d with twice two legs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A blazing star seen in the west,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By six or seven men at least.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two trumpets she does sound at once,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But both of clean contrary tones;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But whether both in the same wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or one before, and one behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We know not; only this can tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The one sounds vilely, th’ other well;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therefore vulgar authors name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Th’ one Good, th’ other Evil, Fame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This tattling gossip knew too well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What mischief Hudibras befell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And straight the spiteful tidings bears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all to th’ unkind widow’s ears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Democritus ne’er laugh’d so loud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see bawds carted through the crowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or funerals with stately pomp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>March slowly on in solemn dump,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As she laugh’d out, until her back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As well as sides, was like to crack.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She vow’d she would go see the sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And visit the distressed Knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do the office of a neighbour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And be a gossip at his labour;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from his wooden jail, the stocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To set at large his fetter-locks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by exchange, parole, or ransom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To free him from th’ enchanted mansion.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This b’ing resolv’d, she call’d for hood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And usher, implements abroad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which ladies wear, beside a slender</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young waiting-damsel to attend her;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All which appearing, on she went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To find the Knight in limbo pent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ’twas not long before she found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him, and the stout Squire, in the pound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both coupled in enchanted tether,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By further leg behind together.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For as he sat upon his rump,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His head, like one in doleful dump,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between his knees, his hands apply’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto his ears on either side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by him, in another hole,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afflicted Ralpho, cheek by jowl;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She came upon him in his wooden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Magician’s circle, on the sudden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As spirits do t’ a conjurer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When in their dreadful shapes th’ appear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No sooner did the Knight perceive her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But straight he fell into a fever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inflam’d all over with disgrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be seen by her in such a place;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which made him hang his head, and scowl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wink and goggle like an owl.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He felt his brains begin to swim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thus the dame accosted him:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This place (quoth she) they say’s enchanted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with delinquent spirits haunted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That here are ty’d in chains, and scourg’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until their guilty crimes be purg’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look, there are two of them appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like persons I have seen somewhere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some have mistaken blocks and posts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For spectres, apparitions, ghosts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With saucer eyes, and horns; and some</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have heard the devil beat a drum;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if our eyes are not false glasses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That give a wrong account of faces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That beard and I should be acquainted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before ’twas conjur’d or enchanted;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For though it be disfigur’d somewhat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if ’t had lately been in combat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It did belong to a worthy knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howe’er this goblin has come by’t.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When Hudibras the lady heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Discoursing thus upon his beard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And speak with such respect and honour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both of the beard and the beard’s owner,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thought it best to set as good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A face upon it as he could,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus he spoke: Lady, your bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And radiant eyes are in the right:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beard’s th’ identic beard you knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The same numerically true;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor is it worn by fiend or elf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But its proprietor himself.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O, heavens! quoth she, can that be true?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I do begin to fear ’tis you:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not by your individual whiskers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But by your dialect and discourse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That never spoke to man or beast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In notions vulgarly exprest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But what malignant star, alas!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has brought you both to this sad pass?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth he, The fortune of the war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which I am less afflicted for,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than to be seen with beard and face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By you in such a homely case.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth she, Those need not he asham’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For being honorably maim’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If he that is in battle conquer’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have any title to his own beard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though yours be sorely lugg’d and torn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It does your visage more adorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than if ’twere prun’d, and starch’d, and lander’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cut square by the Russian standard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A torn beard’s like a tatter’d ensign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That’s bravest which there are most rents in.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That petticoat about your shoulders</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does not so well become a soldier’s;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I’m afraid they are worse handled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although i’ th’ rear; your beard the van led;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And those uneasy bruises make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart for company to ake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see so worshipful a friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ th’ pillory set, at the wrong end.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth Hudibras, This thing call’d pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is (as the learned Stoics maintain)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not bad simpliciter, nor good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But merely as ’tis understood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sense is deceitful, and may feign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As well in counterfeiting pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As other gross phenomenas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which it oft mistakes the case.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But since th’ immortal intellect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(That’s free from error and defect,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose objects still persist the same)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is free from outward bruise and maim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which nought external can expose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gross material bangs or blows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It follows we can ne’er be sure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether we pain or not endure;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And just so far are sore and griev’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As by the fancy is believ’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some have been wounded with conceit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And died of mere opinion straight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Others, though wounded sore in reason,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felt no contusion, nor discretion.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Saxon duke did grow so fat,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-84" id="noteref-84" epub:type="noteref">84</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That mice (as histories relate)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eat grots and labyrinths to dwell in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His postic parts without his feeling:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then how is’t possible a kick</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should e’er reach that way to the quick?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth she, I grant it is in vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For one that’s basted to feel pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because the pangs his bones endure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Contribute nothing to the cure:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet honor hurt is wont to rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pain no med’cine can assuage.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth he, That honour’s very squeamish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That takes a basting for a blemish;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For what’s more hon’rable than scars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or skin to tatters rent in wars?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some have been beaten till they know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What wood a cudgel’s of by th’ blow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some kick’d until they can feel whether</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A shoe be Spanish or neat’s leather;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet have met, after long running,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With some whom they have taught that cunning.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The furthest way about t’ o’ercome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the end does prove the nearest home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By laws of learned duellists,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They that are bruis’d with wood or fists,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And think one beating may for once</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suffice, are cowards and pultroons:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if they dare engage t’ a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They’re stout and gallant fellows reckon’d.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Th’ old Romans freedom did bestow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our princes worship, with a blow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>King Pyrrhus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-85" id="noteref-85" epub:type="noteref">85</a> cur’d his splenetic</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And testy courtiers with a kick.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Negus, when some mighty lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or potentate’s to be restor’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pardon’d for some great offence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With which he’s willing to dispense,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First has him laid upon his belly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then beaten back and side to a jelly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That done, he rises, humbly bows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gives thanks for the princely blows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Departs not meanly proud, and boasting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this magnificent rib-roasting.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beaten soldier proves most manful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, like his sword, endures the anvil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And justly’s held more formidable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The more his valour’s malleable:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he that fears a bastinado</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will run away from his own shadow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though I’m now in durance fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By our own party basely cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ransom, exchange, parole refus’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And worse than by the en’my us’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In close <i xml:lang="la">catasta</i> shut,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-86" id="noteref-86" epub:type="noteref">86</a> past hope</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wit or valour to elope;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As beards the nearer that they tend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To th’ earth still grow more reverend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cannons shoot the higher pitches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lower we let down their breeches;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll make this low dejected fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Advance me to a greater height.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth she, Y’ have almost made me in love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With that which did my pity move.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great wits and valours, like great states,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do sometimes sink with their own weights:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Th’ extremes of glory and of shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like east and west, become the same:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No Indian prince has to his palace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More foll’wers than a thief to th’ gallows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if a beating seem so brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What glories must a whipping have</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such great achievements cannot fail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cast salt on a woman’s tail:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For if I thought your nat’ral talent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of passive courage were so gallant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As you strain hard to have it thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I could grow amorous, and dote.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When Hudibras this language heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He prick’d up’s ears and strok’d his beard;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought he, this is the lucky hour;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wines work when vines are in the flow’r.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This crisis then I’ll set my rest on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And put her boldly to the question.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Madam, what you would seem to doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall be to all the world made out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How I’ve been drubb’d, and with what spirit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And magnanimity I bear it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if you doubt it to be true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll stake myself down against you:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if I fail in love or troth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be you the winner, and take both.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth she, I’ve beard old cunning stagers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say, fools for arguments use wagers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though I prais’d your valour, yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I did not mean to baulk your wit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, if you have, you must needs know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What I have told you before now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you b’ experiment have prov’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cannot love where I’m belov’d.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth Hudibras, ’tis a caprich</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond th’ infliction of a witch;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So cheats to play with those still aim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That do not understand the game.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love in your heart as icily burns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As fire in antique Roman urns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To warm the dead, and vainly light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those only that see nothing by’t.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have you not power to entertain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And render love for love again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As no man can draw in his breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once, and force out air beneath?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or do you love yourself so much,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear all rivals else a grutch?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What fate can lay a greater curse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than you upon yourself would force?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For wedlock without love, some say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is but a lock without a key.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is a kind of rape to marry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One that neglects, or cares not for ye:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For what does make it ravishment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But b’ing against the mind’s consent?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A rape that is the more inhuman</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For being acted by a woman.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why are you fair, but to entice us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To love you, that you may despise us?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But though you cannot love, you say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of your own fanatic way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why should you not at least allow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those that love you to do so too?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, as you fly me, and pursue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love more averse, so I do you;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And am by your own doctrine taught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To practise what you call a fau’t.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth she, If what you say is true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You must fly me as I do you;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ’tis not what we do, but say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In love and preaching, that must sway.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth he, To bid me not to love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is to forbid my pulse to move,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My beard to grow, my ears to prick up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or (when I’m in a fit) to hiccup:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Command me to piss out the moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ’twill as easily be done:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love’s power’s too great to be withstood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By feeble human flesh and blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas he that brought upon his knees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hect’ring, kill-cow Hercules;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Transform’d his leager-lion’s skin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>T’ a petticoat, and made him spin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seiz’d on his club, and made it dwindle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>T’ a feeble distaff and a spindle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas he that made emp’rors gallants</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To their own sisters and their aunts;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set popes and cardinals agog,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To play with pages at leap-frog.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas he that gave our senate purges,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flux’d the house of many a burgess;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made those that represent the nation</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Submit, and suffer amputation;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the grandees o’ the cabal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adjourn to tubs at spring and fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He mounted synod-men, and rode ’em</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Dirty-Lane and little Sodom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made ’em curvet like Spanish jenets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And take the ring at Madam ⸻<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-87" id="noteref-87" epub:type="noteref">87</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas he that made Saint Francis do<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-88" id="noteref-88" epub:type="noteref">88</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>More than the Devil could tempt him to,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In cold and frosty weather grow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enamour’d of a wife of snow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though she were of rigid temper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With melting flames accost and tempt her;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which after in enjoyment quenching,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hung a garland on his engine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth she, If love have these effects,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why is it not forbid our sex?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why is’t not damn’d and interdicted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For diabolical and wicked?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sung, as out of tune, against,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Turk and pope are by the saints?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I find I’ve greater reason for it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than I believ’d before, t’ abhor it.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth Hudibras, These sad effects</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spring from your heathenish neglects</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Love’s great pow’r, which he returns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon yourselves with equal scorns;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And those who worthy lovers slight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plagues with prepost’rous appetite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This made the beauteous queen of Crete</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take a town-bull for her sweet,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-89" id="noteref-89" epub:type="noteref">89</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from her greatness stoop so low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be the rival of a cow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Others to prostitute their great hearts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be baboons’ and monkeys’ sweethearts;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some with the Dev’l himself in league grow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By’s representative a Negro.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas this made vestal maids love-sick,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And venture to be bury’d quick:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some by their fathers, and their brothers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be made mistresses and mothers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis this that proudest <i xml:lang="fr">dames enamours</i></span>
				<br/>
				<span>On lacqueys and valets des chambres;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their haughty stomachs overcomes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And makes ’em stoop to dirty grooms;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To slight the world, and to disparage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Claps, issue, infamy, and marriage.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth she, These judgments are severe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet such as I should rather bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than trust men with their oaths, or prove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their faith and secresy in love.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Says he, There is as weighty reason</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For secresy in love as treason.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love is a burglarer, a felon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That at the windore-eye does steal in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rob the heart, and with his prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steals out again a closer way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which whosoever can discover,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s sure (as he deserves) to suffer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love is a fire, that burns and sparkles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In men as nat’rally as in charcoals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which sooty chemists stop in holes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When out of wood they extract coals:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So lovers should their passions choke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, though they burn, they may not smoke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis like that sturdy thief that stole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dragg’d beasts backwards into’s hole:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Love does lovers, and us men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draws by the tails into his den,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That no impression may discover,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And trace t’ his cave, the wary lover.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if you doubt I should reveal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What you entrust me under seal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll prove myself as close and virtuous</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As your own secretary Albertus.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-90" id="noteref-90" epub:type="noteref">90</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth she, I grant you may be close</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hiding what your aims propose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love-passions are like parables,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By which men still mean something else.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though love be all the world’s pretence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Money’s the mythologic sense;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The real substance of the shadow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which all address and courtship’s made to.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thought he, I understand your play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how to quit you your own way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He that will win his dame must do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Love does when he bends his bow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With one hand thrust the lady from,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with the other pull her home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I grant, quoth he, wealth is a great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Provocative to am’rous heat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is all philtres, and high diet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That makes love rampant, and to fly out:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis beauty always in the flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That buds and blossoms at fourscore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis that by which the sun and moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At their own weapons are outdone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That makes knights-errant fall in trances,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lay about ’em in romances:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis virtue, wit, and worth, and all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That men divine and sacred call:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For what is worth in any thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But so much money as ’twill bring?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or what, but riches is there known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which man can solely call his own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which no creature goes his half,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unless it be to squint and laugh?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-91" id="noteref-91" epub:type="noteref">91</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>I do confess, with goods and land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’d have a wife at second-hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And such you are. Nor is’t your person</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My stomach’s set so sharp and fierce on;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ’tis (your better part) your riches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That my enamour’d heart bewitches.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me your fortune but possess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And settle your person how you please:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or make it o’er in trust to th’ devil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’ll find me reasonable and civil.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth she, I like this plainness better</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than false mock-passion, speech, or letter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or any feat of qualm or sowning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But hanging of yourself, or drowning.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your only way with me to break</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your mind, is breaking of your neck;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For as when merchants break, o’erthrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like nine-pins they strike others down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that would break my heart, which done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My tempting fortune is your own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These are but trifles: ev’ry lover</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will damn himself over and over,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And greater matters undertake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a less worthy mistress’ sake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet th’ are the only ways to prove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Th’ unfeign’d realities of love:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he that hangs, or beats out’s brains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The devil’s in him if he feigns.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth Hudibras, This way’s too rough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For mere experiment and proof:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is no jesting trivial matter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To swing i’ th’ air, or douce in water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, like a water-witch, try love;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That’s to destroy, and not to prove:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if a man should be dissected</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To find what part is disaffected.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your better way is to make over,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In trust, your fortune to your lover.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trust is a trial; if it break,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis not so desp’rate as a neck.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside, th’ experiment’s more certain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men venture necks to gain a fortune:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soldier does it ev’ry day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Eight to the week) for sixpence pay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your pettifoggers damn their souls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To share with knaves in cheating fools:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And merchants, vent’ring through the main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slight pirates, rocks, and horns, for gain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the way I advise you to:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trust me, and see what I will do.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth she, I should be loth to run</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Myself all th’ hazard, and you none;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which must be done, unless some deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of yours aforesaid do precede.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give but yourself one gentle swing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For trial, and I’ll cut the string:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or give that rev’rend head a maul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or two, or three, against a wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To show you are a man of mettle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I’ll engage myself to settle.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth he, My head’s not made of brass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Friar Bacon’s noddle was,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-92" id="noteref-92" epub:type="noteref">92</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor (like the Indian’s skull) so tough,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-93" id="noteref-93" epub:type="noteref">93</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That authors say, ’twas musket-proof;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As it had need to be, to enter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As yet, on any new adventure:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You see what bangs it has endur’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That would, before new feats, be cur’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if that’s all you stand upon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, strike me luck, it shall be done.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth she, The matter’s not so far gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As you suppose: two words t’ a bargain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That may be done, and time enough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When you have given downright proof:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet ’tis no fantastic pique</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have to love, nor coy dislike:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis no implicit, nice aversion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>T’ your conversation, mien, or person,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a just fear, lest you should prove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>False and perfidious in love:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For if I thought you could be true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I could love twice as much as you.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth he, My faith as adamanatine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As chains of destiny, I’ll maintain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>True as Apollo ever spoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or oracle from heart of oak:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-94" id="noteref-94" epub:type="noteref">94</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if you’ll give my flame but vent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now in close hugger-mugger pent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shine upon me but benignly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With that one and that other pigsney,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun and day shall sooner part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than love of you shake off my heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun, that shall no more dispense</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His own, but your bright influence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll carve your name on barks of trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With true-love’s-knots and flourishes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That shall infuse eternal spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And everlasting flourishing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drink ev’ry letter on’t in stum,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make it brisk champagne become:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where’er you tread, your foot shall set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The primrose and the violet:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All spices, perfumes, and sweet powders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall borrow from your breath their odours:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature her charter shall renew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And take all lives of things from you;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world depend upon your eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when you frown upon it, die:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only our loves shall still survive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New worlds and natures to outlive:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, like to heralds’ moons, remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All crescents, without change or wane.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hold, hold, quoth she; no more of this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sir Knight; you take your aim amiss:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For you will find it a hard chapter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To catch me with poetic rapture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which your mastery of art</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth shew itself, and not your heart:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor will you raise in mine combustion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By dint of high heroic fustian.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She that with poetry is won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is but a desk to write upon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what men say of her, they mean</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more than on the thing they lean.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some with Arabian spices strive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>T’ embalm her cruelly alive;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or season her, as French cooks use</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their haut-gouts, bouillies, or ragouts:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Use her so barbarously ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To grind her lips upon a mill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until the facet doublet doth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fit their rhimes rather than her mouth:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her mouth compar’d to an oyster’s, with</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A row of pearl in’t⁠—’stead of teeth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Others make posies of her cheeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where red and whitest colours mix;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which the lily, and the rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Indian lake and ceruse goes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun and moon by her bright eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eclips’d and darken’d in the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are but black patches, that she wears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut into suns, and moons, and stars:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By which astrologers, as well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As those in heav’n above, can tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What strange events they do foreshow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto her under-world below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her voice, the music of the spheres,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So loud, it deafens mortals ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As wise philosophers have thought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that’s the cause we hear it not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This has been done by some, who those</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Th’ ador’d in rhyme would kick in prose;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in those ribbons would have hung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On which melodiously they sung;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That have the hard fate to write best</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those still that deserve it least;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It matters not how false or forc’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the best things be said o’ th’ worst:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It goes for nothing when ’tis said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only the arrow’s drawn to th’ head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether it be a swan or goose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They level at: so shepherds use</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To set the same mark on the hip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both of their sound and rotten sheep:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For wits, that carry low or wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must be aim’d higher, or beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mark, which else they ne’er come nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when they take their aim awry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I do wonder you should choose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This way t’ attack me with your Muse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As one cut out to pass your tricks on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fulhams of poetic fiction:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I rather hop’d I should no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear from you o’ th’ gallanting score:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For hard dry-bastings us’d to prove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The readiest remedies of love;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next a dry-diet; but if those fail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet this uneasy loop-hol’d jail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which y’ are hamper’d by the fetlock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot but put y’ in mind of wedlock:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wedlock, that’s worse than any hole here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If that may serve you for a cooler,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>T’ allay your mettle, all agog</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a wife, the heavier clog:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or rather thank your gentler fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That for a bruis’d or broken pate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has freed you from those knobs that grow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much harder on the marry’d brow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if no dread can cool your courage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From vent’ring on that dragon, marriage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet give me quarter, and advance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To nobler aims your puissance:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Level at beauty and at wit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fairest mark is easiest hit.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth Hudibras, I’m beforehand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that already, with your command;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For where does beauty and high wit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in your constellation meet?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth she, What does a match imply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But likeness and equality?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know you cannot think me fit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be th’ yoke-fellow of your wit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor take one of so mean deserts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be the partner of your parts;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A grace, which, if I could believe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve not the conscience to receive.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That conscience, quoth Hudibras,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is misinform’d: I’ll state the case:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man may be a legal donor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of any thing whereof he’s owner,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And may confer it where he lists,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ th’ judgment of all casuists;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then wit, and parts, and valour, may</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be ali’nated, and made away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By those that are proprietors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I may give or sell my horse.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth she, I grant the case is true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And proper ’twixt your horse and you;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But whether I may take as well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As you may give away or sell?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Buyers, you know, are bid beware;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And worse than thieves receivers are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How shall I answer hue and cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a roan gelding, twelve hands high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All spurr’d and switch’d, a lock on ’s hoof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sorrel mane? Can I bring proof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where, when, by whom, and what y’ were sold for,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the open market toll’d for?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or should I take you for a stray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You must be kept a year and day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Ere I can own you) here i’ the pound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where, if y’ are sought, you may be found:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the meantime I must pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all your provender and hay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth he, It stands me much upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>T’ enervate this objection,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prove myself, by topic clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No gelding, as you would infer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loss of virility’s averr’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be the cause of loss of beard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That does (like embryo in the womb)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abortive on the chin become.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This first a woman did invent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In envy of man’s ornament;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Semiramis of Babylon,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-95" id="noteref-95" epub:type="noteref">95</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who first of all cut men o’ th’ stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mar their beards, and lay foundation</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sow-geldering operation.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look on this beard, and tell me whether</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eunuchs wear such, or geldings either?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next it appears I am no horse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I can argue and discourse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have but two legs, and ne’er a tail.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth she, That nothing will avail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For some philosophers of late here,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-96" id="noteref-96" epub:type="noteref">96</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Write men have four legs by nature,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that ’tis custom makes them go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Erron’ously upon but two;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As ’twas in Germany made good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>B’ a boy that lost himself in a wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And growing down t’ a man, was wont</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wolves upon all four to hunt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As for your reasons drawn from tails,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We cannot say they’re true or false,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till you explain yourself, and show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>B’ experiment, ’tis so or no.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth he, If you’ll join issue on’t,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll give you satisfactory account;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So you will promise, if you lose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To settle all, and be my spouse.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That never shall be done (quoth she)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To one that wants a tail, by me:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For tails by nature sure were meant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As well as beards for ornament:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though the vulgar count them homely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In men or beast they are so comely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So gentee, alamode, and handsome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll never marry man that wants one;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And till you can demonstrate plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You have one equal to your mane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll be torn piecemeal by a horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere I’ll take you for better or worse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Prince of Cambay’s daily food</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is asp, and basilisk, and toad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which makes him have so strong a breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each night he stinks a queen to death;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet I shall rather lie in ’s arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than yours, on any other terms.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth he, What nature can afford,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall produce, upon my word;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if she ever gave that boon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To man, I’ll prove that I have one;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I mean by postulate illation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When you shall offer just occasion:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But since y’ have yet deny’d to give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart, your pris’ner, a reprieve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But made it sink down to my heel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let that at least your pity feel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, for the sufferings of your martyr,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give its poor entertainer quarter;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, by discharge or mainprize, grant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deliv’ry from this base restraint.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth she, I grieve to see your leg</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stuck in a hole here like a peg;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if I knew which way to do’t</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Your honour safe) I’d let you out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That dames by jail delivery</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of errant-knights have been set free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When by enchantment they have been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sometimes for it, too, laid in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is that which knights are bound to do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By order, oath, and honour too:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For what are they renown’d and famous else,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But aiding of distressed damosels?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for a lady, no ways errant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To free a knight, we have no warrant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In any authentical romance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or classic author yet of France;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I’d be loth to have you break</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An ancient custom for a freak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or innovation introduce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In place of things of antique use,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To free your heels by any course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That might b’ unwholesome to your spurs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, if I should consent unto,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is not in my pow’r to do;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ’tis a service must be done ye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With solemn previous ceremony,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which always has been us’d t’ untie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The charms of those who here do lie:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For as the ancients heretofore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Honour’s temple had no door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that which through Virtue’s lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So from this dungeon there’s no way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To honour’d freedom, but by passing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That other virtuous school of lashing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where knights are kept in narrow lists,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wooden lockets ’bout their wrists;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which they for a while are tenants,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for their ladies suffer penance:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whipping, that’s Virtue’s governess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tut’ress of arts and sciences;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That mends the gross mistakes of Nature,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And puts new life into dull matter;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lays foundation for renown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the honours of the gown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This suffer’d, they are set at large,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And freed with hon’rable discharge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then in their robes the penitentials</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are straight presented with credentials,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in their way attended on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By magistrates of ev’ry town:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, all respect and charges paid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They’re to their ancient seats convey’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now if you’ll venture, for my sake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To try the toughness of your back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And suffer (as the rest have done)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The laying of a whipping on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(And may you prosper in your suit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As you with equal vigour do’t,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I here engage myself to loose ye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And free your heels from Caperdewsie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But since our sex’s modesty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will not allow I should be by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring me, on oath, a fair account,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And honour too, when you have done’t,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I’ll admit you to the place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You claim as due in my good grace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If matrimony and hanging go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By dest’ny, why not whipping too?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What med’cine else can cure the fits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lovers when they lose their wits?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love is a boy by poets styl’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then spare the rod, and spoil the child.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Persian emp’ror whipp’d his grannam,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-97" id="noteref-97" epub:type="noteref">97</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sea, his mother Venus came on;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hence some rev’rend men approve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of rosemary in making love.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As skilful coopers hoop their tubs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Lydian and with Phrygian dubs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why may not whipping have as good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A grace? perform’d in time and mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With comely movement, and by art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raise passion in a lady’s heart?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is an easier way to make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love by, than that which many take.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who would not rather suffer whipping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than swallow toasts of bits of ribbon?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make wicked verses, treats, and faces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spell names over with beer-glasses;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be under vows to hang and die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love’s sacrifice, and all a lie?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With China-oranges, and tarts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whining plays, lay baits for hearts?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bribe chamber-maids, with love and money,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To break no roguish jests upon ye?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For lilies limn’d on cheeks, and roses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With painted perfumes, hazard noses?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, vent’ring to be brisk and wanton,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do penance in a paper lantern?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All this you may compound for now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By suffering what I offer you;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which is no more than has been done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By knights for ladies long agone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not the great La Mancha do so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the Infanta del Toboso?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not th’ illustrious Bassa make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself a slave for Miss’s sake?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with bull’s pizzle, for her love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was taw ’d as gentle as a glove?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was not young Florio sent (to cool</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His flame for Biancafiore) to school,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where pedant made his pathic bum</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For her sake suffer martyrdom?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not a certain lady whip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of late her husband’s own lordship?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though a grandee of the house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Claw’d him with fundamental blows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ty’d him stark naked to a bed-post,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And firk’d his hide, as if sh’ had rid post;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after in the sessions-court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where whipping’s judg’d, had honour for’t;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This swear you will perform, and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll set you from the enchanted den,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the magician’s circle clear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quoth he, I do profess and swear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will perform what you enjoin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or may I never see you mine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Amen (quoth she;) then turn’d about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bid her Squire let him out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ere an artist could be found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>T’ undo the charms another bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun grew low, and left the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put down (some write) by ladies’ eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moon pull’d off her veil of light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hides her face by day from sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Mysterious veil, of brightness made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That’s both her lustre and her shade,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the lantern of the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With shining horns hung out her light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For darkness is the proper sphere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where all false glories use t’ appear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The twinkling stars began to muster,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And glitter with their borrow’d lustre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While sleep the weary’d world reliev’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By counterfeiting death reviv’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His whipping penance till the morn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our vot’ry thought it best t’ adjourn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not to carry on a work</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of such importance in the dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With erring haste, but rather stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And do’t in the open face of day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the mean time go in quest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of next retreat to take his rest.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
