<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Canto II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="canto-2-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</h3>
					<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse">
						<header>
							<p>The Argument</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>The Knight and Squire, in hot dispute,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Within an ace of falling out,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Are parted with a sudden fright</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of strange alarm, and stranger sight;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With which adventuring to stickle,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>They're sent away in nasty pickle.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</header>

<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem"><p>
<span>'Tis strange how some mens' tempers suit</span><br/>

<span>(Like bawd and brandy) with dispute,</span><br/>

<span>That for their own opinions stand last</span><br/>

<span>Only to have them claw'd and canvast;</span><br/>

<span>That keep their consciences in cases,                           5</span><br/>

<span>As fiddlers do their crowds and bases,</span><br/>

<span>Ne'er to be us'd, but when they're bent</span><br/>

<span>To play a fit for argument;</span><br/>

<span>Make true and false, unjust and just,</span><br/>

<span>Of no use but to be discust;                                   10</span><br/>

<span>Dispute, and set a paradox</span><br/>

<span>Like a straight boot upon the stocks,</span><br/>

<span>And stretch it more unmercifully</span><br/>

<span>Than HELMONT, MONTAIGN, WHITE, or TULLY,</span><br/>

<span>So th' ancient Stoicks, in their porch,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-97" id="noteref-97" epub:type="noteref">97</a>                    15</span><br/>

<span>With fierce dispute maintain'd their church;</span><br/>

<span>Beat out their brains in fight and study,</span><br/>

<span>To prove that Virtue is a Body;</span><br/>

<span>That Bonum is an Animal,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-98" id="noteref-98" epub:type="noteref">98</a></span><br/>

<span>Made good with stout polemic brawl;                            20</span><br/>

<span>in which some hundreds on the place</span><br/>

<span>Were slain outright; and many a face</span><br/>

<span>Retrench'd of nose, and eyes, and beard,</span><br/>

<span>To maintain what their sect averr'd;</span><br/>

<span>All which the Knight and Squire, in wrath,                     25</span><br/>

<span>Had like t' have suffered for their faith,</span><br/>

<span>Each striving to make good his own,</span><br/>

<span>As by the sequel shall be shown.</span><br/>
</p>

<p>
<span>The Sun had long since, in the lap</span><br/>

<span>Of THETIS, taken out his nap,                                  30</span><br/>

<span>And, like a lobster boil'd, the morn</span><br/>

<span>From black to red began to turn,</span><br/>

<span>When HUDIBRAS, whom thoughts and aking,</span><br/>

<span>'Twixt sleeping kept all night and waking,</span><br/>

<span>Began to rub his drowsy eyes,                                  35</span><br/>

<span>And from his couch prepar'd to rise,</span><br/>

<span>Resolving to dispatch the deed</span><br/>

<span>He vow'd to do with trusty speed.</span><br/>

<span>But first, with knocking loud, and bawling,</span><br/>

<span>He rouz'd the Squire, in truckle lolling;                      40</span><br/>

<span>And, after many circumstances,</span><br/>

<span>Which vulgar authors, in romances,</span><br/>

<span>Do use to spend their time and wits on,</span><br/>

<span>To make impertinent description,</span><br/>

<span>They got (with much ado) to horse,                             45</span><br/>

<span>And to the Castle bent their course,</span><br/>

<span>In which he to the Dame before</span><br/>

<span>To suffer whipping duly swore;</span><br/>

<span>Where now arriv'd, and half unharnest,</span><br/>

<span>To carry on the work in earnest,                               50</span><br/>

<span>He stopp'd, and paus'd upon the sudden,</span><br/>

<span>And with a serious forehead plodding,</span><br/>

<span>Sprung a new scruple his head,</span><br/>

<span>Which first he scratch'd, and after said —</span><br/>

<span>Whether it be direct infringing                                55</span><br/>

<span>An oath, if I should wave this swingeing,</span><br/>

<span>And what I've sworn to bear, forbear,</span><br/>

<span>And so b' equivocation swear,</span><br/>

<span>Or whether it be a lesser sin</span><br/>

<span>To be forsworn than act the thing,                             60</span><br/>

<span>Are deep and subtle points, which must,</span><br/>

<span>T' inform my conscience, be discust;</span><br/>

<span>In which to err a tittle may</span><br/>

<span>To errors infinite make way;</span><br/>

<span>And therefore I desire to know                                 65</span><br/>

<span>Thy judgment e'er we further go.</span><br/>
</p>

<p>
<span>Quoth Ralpho, Since you do enjoin't,</span><br/>

<span>I shall enlarge upon the point;</span><br/>

<span>And, for my own part, do not doubt</span><br/>

<span>Th' affirmative may be made out,                               70</span><br/>

<span>But first, to state the case aright,</span><br/>

<span>For best advantage of our light,</span><br/>

<span>And thus 'tis: Whether 't be a sin</span><br/>

<span>To claw and curry your own skin,</span><br/>

<span>Greater or less, than to forbear,                              75</span><br/>

<span>And that you are forsworn, forswear.</span><br/>

<span>But first, o' th' first: The inward man,</span><br/>

<span>And outward, like a clan and clan,</span><br/>

<span>Have always been at daggers-drawing,</span><br/>

<span>And one another clapper-clawing.                               80</span><br/>

<span>Not that they really cuff, or fence,</span><br/>

<span>But in a Spiritual Mystick sense;</span><br/>

<span>Which to mistake, and make 'em squabble</span><br/>

<span>In literal fray's abominable.</span><br/>

<span>'Tis heathenish, in frequent use                               85</span><br/>

<span>With Pagans and apostate Jews,</span><br/>

<span>To offer sacrifice of bridewells,</span><br/>

<span>Like modern Indians to their idols;</span><br/>

<span>And mongrel Christians of our times,</span><br/>

<span>That expiate less with greater crimes,                         90</span><br/>

<span>And call the foul abomination,</span><br/>

<span>Contrition and mortification.</span><br/>

<span>Is 't not enough we're bruis'd and kicked</span><br/>

<span>With sinful members of the wicked,</span><br/>

<span>Our vessels, that are sanctify'd,                              95</span><br/>

<span>Prophan'd and curry'd back and side,</span><br/>

<span>But we must claw ourselves with shameful</span><br/>

<span>And heathen stripes, by their example;</span><br/>

<span>Which (were there nothing to forbid it)</span><br/>

<span>Is impious because they did it;                               100</span><br/>

<span>This, therefore, may be justly reckon'd</span><br/>

<span>A heinous sin. Now to the second</span><br/>

<span>That Saints may claim a dispensation</span><br/>

<span>To swear and forswear, on occasion,</span><br/>

<span>I doubt not but it will appear                                105</span><br/>

<span>With pregnant light: the point is clear.</span><br/>

<span>Oaths are but words, and words but wind;</span><br/>

<span>Too feeble implements to bind;</span><br/>

<span>And hold with deeds proportion so</span><br/>

<span>As shadows to a substance do.                                 110</span><br/>

<span>Then when they strive for place, 'tis fit</span><br/>

<span>The weaker vessel should submit.</span><br/>

<span>Although your Church be opposite</span><br/>

<span>To ours as Black Friars are to White,</span><br/>

<span>In rule and order, yet I grant,                               115</span><br/>

<span>You are a Reformado Saint;</span><br/>

<span>And what the Saints do claim as due,</span><br/>

<span>You may pretend a title to:</span><br/>

<span>But Saints whom oaths and vows oblige,</span><br/>

<span>Know little of their privilege;                               120</span><br/>

<span>Further (I mean) than carrying on</span><br/>

<span>Some self-advantage of their own:</span><br/>

<span>For if the Dev'l, to serve his turn,</span><br/>

<span>Can tell troth, why the Saints should scorn,</span><br/>

<span>When it serves theirs, to swear and lye;                      125</span><br/>

<span>I think there's little reason why:</span><br/>

<span>Else h' has a greater pow'r than they,</span><br/>

<span>Which 't were impiety to say.</span><br/>

<span>W' are not commanded to forbear</span><br/>

<span>Indefinitely at all to swear;                                 130</span><br/>

<span>But to swear idly, and in vain,</span><br/>

<span>Without self-interest or gain</span><br/>

<span>For breaking of an oath, and lying,</span><br/>

<span>Is but a kind of self-denying;</span><br/>

<span>A Saint-like virtue: and from hence                           135</span><br/>

<span>Some have broke oaths by Providence</span><br/>

<span>Some, to the glory of the Lord,</span><br/>

<span>Perjur'd themselves, and broke their word;</span><br/>

<span>And this the constant rule and practice</span><br/>

<span>Of all our late Apostles acts is.                             140</span><br/>

<span>Was not the cause at first begun</span><br/>

<span>With perjury, and carried on?</span><br/>

<span>Was there an oath the Godly took,</span><br/>

<span>But in due time and place they broke?</span><br/>

<span>Did we not bring our oaths in first,                          145</span><br/>

<span>Before our plate, to have them burst,</span><br/>

<span>And cast in fitter models for</span><br/>

<span>The present use of Church and War?</span><br/>

<span>Did not our Worthies of the House,</span><br/>

<span>Before they broke the peace, break vows?                      150</span><br/>

<span>For having freed us first from both</span><br/>

<span>Th' Allegiance and Supremacy Oath,</span><br/>

<span>Did they not next compel the Nation</span><br/>

<span>To take and break the Protestation?</span><br/>

<span>To swear, and after to recant                                 155</span><br/>

<span>The solemn League and Covenant?</span><br/>

<span>To take th' Engagement, and disclaim it,</span><br/>

<span>Enforc'd by those who first did frame it</span><br/>

<span>Did they not swear, at first, to fight</span><br/>

<span>For the KING'S Safety and his Right,                          160</span><br/>

<span>And after march'd to find him out,</span><br/>

<span>And charg'd him home with horse and foot;</span><br/>

<span>But yet still had the confidence</span><br/>

<span>To swear it was in his defence</span><br/>

<span>Did they not swear to live and die                            165</span><br/>

<span>With Essex, and straight laid him by?</span><br/>
</p>

<p>
<span>If that were all, for some have swore</span><br/>

<span>As false as they, if th' did no more,</span><br/>

<span>Did they not swear to maintain Law,</span><br/>

<span>In which that swearing made a flaw?                           170</span><br/>

<span>For Protestant Religion vow,</span><br/>

<span>That did that vowing disallow?</span><br/>

<span>For Privilege of Parliament,</span><br/>

<span>In which that swearing made a rent?</span><br/>

<span>And since, of all the three, not one                          175</span><br/>

<span>Is left in being, 'tis well known.</span><br/>

<span>Did they not swear, in express words,</span><br/>

<span>To prop and back the House of Lords,</span><br/>

<span>And after turn'd out the whole House-full</span><br/>

<span>Of Peers, as dang'rous and unusefull?                         180</span><br/>

<span>So CROMWELL, with deep oaths and vows,</span><br/>

<span>Swore all the Commons out o' th' House;</span><br/>

<span>Vow'd that the red-coats would disband,</span><br/>

<span>Ay, marry wou'd they, at their command;</span><br/>

<span>And troll'd them on, and swore, and swore,                    185</span><br/>

<span>Till th' army turn'd them out of door.</span><br/>

<span>This tells us plainly what they thought,</span><br/>

<span>That oaths and swearing go for nought,</span><br/>

<span>And that by them th' were only meant</span><br/>

<span>To serve for an expedient.                                    190</span><br/>

<span>What was the Public Faith found out for,</span><br/>

<span>But to slur men of what they fought for</span><br/>

<span>The Public Faith, which ev'ry one</span><br/>

<span>Is bound t' observe, yet kept by none;</span><br/>

<span>And if that go for nothing, why                               195</span><br/>

<span>Should Private Faith have such a tye?</span><br/>

<span>Oaths were not purpos'd more than law,</span><br/>

<span>To keep the good and just in awe,</span><br/>

<span>But to confine the bad and sinful,</span><br/>

<span>Like moral cattle, in a pinfold.                              200</span><br/>

<span>A Saint's of th' Heav'nly Realm a Peer;</span><br/>

<span>And as no Peer is bound to swear,</span><br/>

<span>But on the Gospel of his Honour,</span><br/>

<span>Of which he may dispose as owner,</span><br/>

<span>It follows, though the thing be forgery,                      205</span><br/>

<span>And false th' affirm, it is no perjury,</span><br/>

<span>But a mere ceremony, and a breach</span><br/>

<span>Of nothing, but a form of speech;</span><br/>

<span>And goes for no more when 'tis took,</span><br/>

<span>Than mere saluting of the book.                               210</span><br/>

<span>Suppose the Scriptures are of force,</span><br/>

<span>They're but commissions of course,</span><br/>

<span>And Saints have freedom to digress,</span><br/>

<span>And vary from 'em, as they please;</span><br/>

<span>Or mis-interpret them, by private                             215</span><br/>

<span>Instructions, to all aims they drive at.</span><br/>

<span>Then why should we ourselves abridge</span><br/>

<span>And curtail our own privilege?</span><br/>

<span>Quakers (that, like to lanthorns, bear</span><br/>

<span>Their light within 'em) will not swear                        220</span><br/>

<span>Their gospel is an accidence,</span><br/>

<span>By which they construe conscience,</span><br/>

<span>And hold no sin so deeply red,</span><br/>

<span>As that of breaking Priscian's head;</span><br/>

<span>(The head and founder of their order,)                        225</span><br/>

<span>That stirring Hat's held worse than murder.</span><br/>

<span>These thinking th' are oblig'd to troth</span><br/>

<span>In swearing, will not take an oath</span><br/>

<span>Like mules, who, if th' have not their will</span><br/>

<span>To keep their own pace, stand stock-still:                    230</span><br/>

<span>But they are weak, and little know</span><br/>

<span>What free-born consciences may do.</span><br/>

<span>'Tis the temptation of the Devil</span><br/>

<span>That makes all human actions evil</span><br/>

<span>For Saints may do the same things by                          235</span><br/>

<span>The Spirit, in sincerity,</span><br/>

<span>Which other men are tempted to,</span><br/>

<span>And at the Devil's instance do</span><br/>

<span>And yet the actions be contrary,</span><br/>

<span>Just as the Saints and Wicked vary.                           240</span><br/>

<span>For as on land there is no beast,</span><br/>

<span>But in some fish at sea's exprest,</span><br/>

<span>So in the Wicked there's no Vice,</span><br/>

<span>Of which the Saints have not a spice;</span><br/>

<span>And yet that thing that's pious in                            245</span><br/>

<span>The one, in th' other is a sin.</span><br/>

<span>Is't not ridiculous, and nonsense,</span><br/>

<span>A Saint should be a slave to conscience,</span><br/>

<span>That ought to be above such fancies,</span><br/>

<span>As far as above ordinances?                                   250</span><br/>

<span>She's of the wicked, as I guess,</span><br/>

<span>B' her looks, her language, and her dress:</span><br/>

<span>And though, like constables, we search,</span><br/>

<span>For false wares, one another's Church,</span><br/>

<span>Yet all of us hold this for true,                             255</span><br/>

<span>No Faith is to the wicked due;</span><br/>

<span>For truth is precious and divine;</span><br/>

<span>Too rich a pearl for carnal swine,</span><br/>
</p>

<p>
<span>Quoth HUDIBRAS, All this is true;                             260</span><br/>

<span>Yet 'tis not fit that all men knew,</span><br/>

<span>Those mysteries and revelations,</span><br/>

<span>And therefore topical evasions</span><br/>

<span>Of subtle turns and shifts of sense,</span><br/>

<span>Serve best with th' wicked for pretence,</span><br/>

<span>Such as the learned Jesuits use,                              265</span><br/>

<span>And Presbyterians for excuse</span><br/>

<span>Against the Protestants, when th' happen</span><br/>

<span>To find their Churches taken napping:</span><br/>

<span>As thus: A breach of oath is duple,</span><br/>

<span>And either way admits a scruple,                              270</span><br/>

<span>And may be, ex parte of the maker</span><br/>

<span>More criminal than th' injur'd taker;</span><br/>

<span>For he that strains too far a vow,</span><br/>

<span>Will break it, like an o'er-bent bow:</span><br/>

<span>And he that made, and forc'd it, broke it,                    275</span><br/>

<span>Not he that for convenience took it.</span><br/>

<span>A broken oath is, quatenus oath,</span><br/>

<span>As sound t' all purposes of troth,</span><br/>

<span>As broken laws are ne'er the worse;</span><br/>

<span>Nay, till th' are broken have no force.                       280</span><br/>

<span>What's justice to a man, or laws,</span><br/>

<span>That never comes within their claws</span><br/>

<span>They have no pow'r, but to admonish:</span><br/>

<span>Cannot controul, coerce, or punish,</span><br/>

<span>Until they're broken, and then touch                          285</span><br/>

<span>Those only that do make 'em such.</span><br/>

<span>Beside, no engagement is allow'd</span><br/>

<span>By men in prison made for good;</span><br/>

<span>For when they're set at liberty,</span><br/>

<span>They're from th' engagement too set free.                     290</span><br/>

<span>The rabbins write, when any Jew</span><br/>

<span>Did make to God, or man, a vow,</span><br/>

<span>Which afterward he found untoward,</span><br/>

<span>And stubborn to be kept, or too hard,</span><br/>

<span>Any three other Jews o' th' nation,                           295</span><br/>

<span>Might free him from the obligation</span><br/>

<span>And have not two saints pow'r to use</span><br/>

<span>A greater privilege than three Jews?</span><br/>

<span>The court of conscience, which in man</span><br/>

<span>Should be supreme and sovereign,                              300</span><br/>

<span>Is't fit should be subordinate</span><br/>

<span>To ev'ry petty court i' the state,</span><br/>

<span>And have less power than the lesser,</span><br/>

<span>To deal with perjury at pleasure?</span><br/>

<span>Have its proceedings disallow'd, or                           305</span><br/>

<span>Allow'd, at fancy of Pye-Powder?</span><br/>

<span>Tell all it does, or does not know,</span><br/>

<span>For swearing ex officio?</span><br/>

<span>Be forc'd t' impeach a broken hedge,</span><br/>

<span>And pigs unring'd at Vis. Franc. Pledge?                      310</span><br/>

<span>Discover thieves, and bawds, recusants,</span><br/>

<span>Priests, witches, eves-droppers, and nuisance:</span><br/>

<span>Tell who did play at games unlawful,</span><br/>

<span>And who fill'd pots of ale but half-full</span><br/>

<span>And have no pow'r at all, nor shift,                          315</span><br/>

<span>To help itself at a dead lift</span><br/>

<span>Why should not conscience have vacation</span><br/>

<span>As well as other courts o' th' nation</span><br/>

<span>Have equal power to adjourn,</span><br/>

<span>Appoint appearance and return;                                320</span><br/>

<span>And make as nice distinction serve</span><br/>

<span>To split a case, as those that carve,</span><br/>

<span>Invoking cuckolds' names, hit joints;</span><br/>

<span>Why should not tricks as slight do points</span><br/>

<span>Is not th' High-Court of Justice sworn                        325</span><br/>

<span>To judge that law that serves their turn,</span><br/>

<span>Make their own jealousies high-treason,</span><br/>

<span>And fix 'm whomsoe'er they please on?</span><br/>

<span>Cannot the learned counsel there</span><br/>

<span>Make laws in any shape appear?                                330</span><br/>

<span>Mould 'em as witches do their clay,</span><br/>

<span>When they make pictures to destroy</span><br/>

<span>And vex 'em into any form</span><br/>

<span>That fits their purpose to do harm?</span><br/>

<span>Rack 'em until they do confess,                               335</span><br/>

<span>Impeach of treason whom they please,</span><br/>

<span>And most perfidiously condemn</span><br/>

<span>Those that engag'd their lives for them?</span><br/>

<span>And yet do nothing in their own sense,</span><br/>

<span>But what they ought by oath and conscience?                   340</span><br/>

<span>Can they not juggle, and, with slight</span><br/>

<span>Conveyance, play with wrong and right;</span><br/>

<span>And sell their blasts of wind as dear</span><br/>

<span>As Lapland witches bottled air?</span><br/>

<span>Will not fear, favour, bribe and grudge                       345</span><br/>

<span>The same case sev'ral ways adjudge?</span><br/>

<span>As seamen, with the self-same gale,</span><br/>

<span>Will sev'ral different courses sail?</span><br/>

<span>As when the sea breaks o'er its bounds,</span><br/>

<span>And overflows the level grounds,                              350</span><br/>

<span>Those banks and dams, that, like a screen,</span><br/>

<span>Did keep it out, now keep it in;</span><br/>

<span>So when tyrannic usurpation</span><br/>

<span>Invades the freedom of a nation,</span><br/>

<span>The laws o' th' land, that were intended                      355</span><br/>

<span>To keep it out, are made defend it.</span><br/>

<span>Does not in chanc'ry ev'ry man swear</span><br/>

<span>What makes best for him in his answer?</span><br/>

<span>Is not the winding up witnesses</span><br/>

<span>And nicking more than half the bus'ness?                      360</span><br/>

<span>For witnesses, like watches, go</span><br/>

<span>Just as they're set, too fast or slow;</span><br/>

<span>And where in conscience they're strait-lac'd,</span><br/>

<span>'Tis ten to one that side is cast.</span><br/>

<span>Do not your juries give their verdict                         365</span><br/>

<span>As if they felt the cause, not heard it?</span><br/>

<span>And as they please, make matter of fact</span><br/>

<span>Run all on one side, as they're pack't?</span><br/>

<span>Nature has made man's breast no windores,</span><br/>

<span>To publish what he does within doors,                         370</span><br/>

<span>Nor what dark secrets there inhabit,</span><br/>

<span>Unless his own rash folly blab it.</span><br/>

<span>If oaths can do a man no good</span><br/>

<span>In his own bus'ness, why they shou'd</span><br/>

<span>In other matters do him hurt,                                 375</span><br/>

<span>I think there's little reason for't.</span><br/>

<span>He that imposes an oath, makes it,</span><br/>

<span>Not he that for convenience takes it:</span><br/>

<span>Then how can any man be said</span><br/>

<span>To break an oath he never made?                               380</span><br/>

<span>These reasons may, perhaps, look oddly</span><br/>

<span>To th' Wicked, though th' evince the Godly;</span><br/>

<span>But if they will not serve to clear</span><br/>

<span>My honour, I am ne'er the near.</span><br/>

<span>Honour is like that glassy bubble                             385</span><br/>

<span>That finds philosophers such trouble,</span><br/>

<span>Whose least part crack't, the whole does fly,</span><br/>

<span>And wits are crack'd to find out why.</span><br/>
</p>

<p>
<span>Quoth RALPHO, Honour's but a word</span><br/>

<span>To swear by only in a Lord:                                   390</span><br/>

<span>In other men 'tis but a huff,</span><br/>

<span>To vapour with instead of proof;</span><br/>

<span>That, like a wen, looks big and swells,</span><br/>

<span>Is senseless, and just nothing else.</span><br/>
</p>

<p>
<span>Let it (quoth he) be what it will,                            395</span><br/>

<span>It has the world's opinion still.</span><br/>

<span>But as men are not wise that run</span><br/>

<span>The slightest hazard they may shun,</span><br/>

<span>There may a medium be found out</span><br/>

<span>To clear to all the world the doubt;                          400</span><br/>

<span>And that is, if a man may do't,</span><br/>

<span>By proxy whipt, or substitute.</span><br/>
</p>

<p>
<span>Though nice and dark the point appear,</span><br/>

<span>(Quoth RALPH) it may hold up and clear.</span><br/>

<span>That sinners may supply the place                             405</span><br/>

<span>Of suff'ring Saints is a plain case.</span><br/>

<span>Justice gives sentence many times</span><br/>

<span>On one man for another's crimes.</span><br/>
</p>

<p>
<span>Our brethren of NEW ENGLAND use</span><br/>

<span>Choice malefactors to excuse,                                 410</span><br/>

<span>And hang the guiltless in their stead,</span><br/>

<span>Of whom the Churches have less need;</span><br/>

<span>As lately 't happen'd: In a town<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-99" id="noteref-99" epub:type="noteref">99</a></span><br/>

<span>There liv'd a cobler, and but one,</span><br/>

<span>That out of doctrine could cut use,                           415</span><br/>

<span>And mend men's lives as well as shoes,</span><br/>

<span>This precious brother having slain,</span><br/>

<span>In time of peace, an Indian,</span><br/>

<span>(Not out of malice, but mere zeal,</span><br/>

<span>Because he was an Infidel,)                                   420</span><br/>

<span>The mighty TOTTIPOTTYMOY</span><br/>

<span>Sent to our elders an envoy,</span><br/>

<span>Complaining sorely of the breach</span><br/>

<span>Of league held forth by brother Patch</span><br/>

<span>Against the articles in force                                 425</span><br/>

<span>Between both Churches, his and ours</span><br/>

<span>For which he crav'd the Saints to render</span><br/>

<span>Into his hands or hang th' offender</span><br/>

<span>But they maturely having weigh'd,</span><br/>

<span>They had no more but him o' th' trade,                        430</span><br/>

<span>(A man that serv'd them in a double</span><br/>

<span>Capacity, to teach and cobble,)</span><br/>

<span>Resolv'd to spare him; yet, to do</span><br/>

<span>The Indian Hoghgan Moghgan too</span><br/>

<span>Impartial justice, in his stead did                           435</span><br/>

<span>Hang an old Weaver, that was bed-rid.</span><br/>

<span>Then wherefore way not you be skipp'd,</span><br/>

<span>And in your room another whipp'd?</span><br/>

<span>For all Philosophers, but the Sceptick,</span><br/>

<span>Hold whipping may be sympathetick.                            440</span><br/>
</p>

<p>
<span>It is enough, quoth HUDIBRAS,</span><br/>

<span>Thou hast resolv'd and clear'd the case</span><br/>

<span>And canst, in conscience, not refuse</span><br/>

<span>From thy own doctrine to raise use.</span><br/>

<span>I know thou wilt not (for my sake)                            445</span><br/>

<span>Be tender-conscienc'd of thy back.</span><br/>

<span>Then strip thee off thy carnal jerking,</span><br/>

<span>And give thy outward-fellow a ferking;</span><br/>

<span>For when thy vessel is new hoop'd,</span><br/>

<span>All leaks of sinning will be stopp'd.                         450</span><br/>
</p>

<p>
<span>Quoth RALPHO, You mistake the matter;</span><br/>

<span>For in all scruples of this nature,</span><br/>

<span>No man includes himself, nor turns</span><br/>

<span>The point upon his own concerns.</span><br/>

<span>As no man of his own self catches                             455</span><br/>

<span>The itch, or amorous French aches</span><br/>

<span>So no man does himself convince,</span><br/>

<span>By his own doctrine, of his sins</span><br/>

<span>And though all cry down self, none means</span><br/>

<span>His ownself in a literal sense.                               460</span><br/>

<span>Beside, it is not only foppish,</span><br/>

<span>But vile, idolatrous and Popish,</span><br/>

<span>For one man, out of his own skin,</span><br/>

<span>To ferk and whip another's sin;</span><br/>

<span>As pedants out of school-boys' breeches                       465</span><br/>

<span>Do claw and curry their own itches.</span><br/>

<span>But in this case it is prophane,</span><br/>

<span>And sinful too, because in vain;</span><br/>

<span>For we must take our oaths upon it,</span><br/>

<span>You did the deed, when I have done it.                        470</span><br/>
</p>

<p>
<span>Quoth HUDIBRAS, That's answer'd soon</span><br/>

<span>Give us the whip, we'll lay it on.</span><br/>
</p>

<p>
<span>Quoth RALPHO, That we may swear true,</span><br/>

<span>'Twere properer that I whipp'd you</span><br/>

<span>For when with your consent 'tis done,                         475</span><br/>

<span>The act is really your own.</span><br/>
</p>

<p>
<span>Quoth HUDIBRAS, It is in vain</span><br/>

<span>(I see) to argue 'gainst the grain;</span><br/>

<span>Or, like the stars, incline men to</span><br/>

<span>What they're averse themselves to do:                         480</span><br/>

<span>For when disputes are weary'd out,</span><br/>

<span>'Tis interest still resolves the doubt</span><br/>

<span>But since no reason can confute ye,</span><br/>

<span>I'll try to force you to your duty</span><br/>

<span>For so it is, howe'er you mince it;                           485</span><br/>

<span>As ere we part, I shall evince it</span><br/>

<span>And curry (if you stand out) whether</span><br/>

<span>You will or no, your stubborn leather.</span><br/>

<span>Canst thou refuse to hear thy part</span><br/>

<span>I' th' publick work, base as thou art?                        490</span><br/>

<span>To higgle thus for a few blows,</span><br/>

<span>To gain thy Knight an op'lent spouse</span><br/>

<span>Whose wealth his bowels yearn to purchase,</span><br/>

<span>Merely for th' interest of the Churches;</span><br/>

<span>And when he has it in his claws,                              495</span><br/>

<span>Will not be hide-bound to the Cause?</span><br/>

<span>Nor shalt thou find him a Curmudgin,</span><br/>

<span>If thou dispatch it without grudging.</span><br/>

<span>If not, resolve, before we go,</span><br/>

<span>That you and I must pull a crow.                              500</span><br/>
</p>

<p>
<span>Y' had best (quoth RALPHO) as the ancients</span><br/>

<span>Say wisely, Have a care o' th' main chance,</span><br/>

<span>And look before you ere you leap;</span><br/>

<span>For as you sow, y' are like to reap:</span><br/>

<span>And were y' as good as George-a-Green,                        505</span><br/>

<span>I shall make bold to turn agen</span><br/>

<span>Nor am I doubtful of the issue</span><br/>

<span>In a just quarrel, and mine is so.</span><br/>

<span>Is't fitting for a man of honour</span><br/>

<span>To whip the Saints, like Bishop Bonner?                       510</span><br/>

<span>A Knight t' usurp the beadle's office,</span><br/>

<span>For which y' are like to raise brave trophies.</span><br/>

<span>But I advise you (not for fear,</span><br/>

<span>But for your own sake) to forbear;</span><br/>

<span>And for the Churches, which may chance,                       515</span><br/>

<span>From hence, to spring a variance;</span><br/>

<span>And raise among themselves new scruples,</span><br/>

<span>Whom common danger hardly couples.</span><br/>

<span>Remember how, in arms and politicks,</span><br/>

<span>We still have worsted all your holy tricks;                   520</span><br/>

<span>Trepann'd your party with intrigue,</span><br/>

<span>And took your grandees down a peg;</span><br/>

<span>New modell'd th' army, and cashier'd</span><br/>

<span>All that to legion SMEC adher'd;</span><br/>

<span>Made a mere utensil o' your Church,                           525</span><br/>

<span>And after left it in the lurch</span><br/>

<span>A scaffold to build up our own,</span><br/>

<span>And, when w' had done with't, pull'd it down</span><br/>

<span>Capoch'd your Rabbins of the Synod,</span><br/>

<span>And snap'd their Canons with a why-not;                       530</span><br/>

<span>(Grave Synod Men, that were rever'd</span><br/>

<span>For solid face and depth of beard;)</span><br/>

<span>Their classic model prov'd a maggot,</span><br/>

<span>Their direct'ry an Indian Pagod;</span><br/>

<span>And drown'd their discipline like a kitten,                   535</span><br/>

<span>On which they'd been so long a sitting;</span><br/>

<span>Decry'd it as a holy cheat,</span><br/>

<span>Grown out of date, and obsolete;</span><br/>

<span>And all the Saints of the first grass</span><br/>

<span>As casting foals of Balaam's ass.                             540</span><br/>
</p>

<p>
<span>At this the Knight grew high in chafe,</span><br/>

<span>And staring furiously on RALPH,</span><br/>

<span>He trembled, and look'd pale with ire</span><br/>

<span>Like ashes first, then red as fire.</span><br/>

<span>Have I (quoth he) been ta'en in fight,                        545</span><br/>

<span>And for so many moons lain by't,</span><br/>

<span>And, when all other means did fail,</span><br/>

<span>Have been exchang'd for tubs of ale?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-100" id="noteref-100" epub:type="noteref">100</a></span><br/>

<span>Not but they thought me worth a ransome</span><br/>

<span>Much more consid'rable and handsome,                          550</span><br/>

<span>But for their own sakes, and for fear</span><br/>

<span>They were not safe when I was there</span><br/>

<span>Now to be baffled by a scoundrel,</span><br/>

<span>An upstart sect'ry, and a mungrel;</span><br/>

<span>Such as breed out of peccant humours,                         555</span><br/>

<span>Of our own Church, like wens or tumours,</span><br/>

<span>And, like a maggot in a sore,</span><br/>

<span>Would that which gave it life devour;</span><br/>

<span>It never shall be done or said;</span><br/>

<span>With that he seiz'd upon his blade;                           560</span><br/>

<span>And RALPHO too, as quick and bold,</span><br/>

<span>Upon his basket-hilt laid hold,</span><br/>

<span>With equal readiness prcpar'd</span><br/>

<span>To draw, and stand upon his guard;</span><br/>

<span>When both were parted on the sudden,                          565</span><br/>

<span> With hideous clamour, and a loud one</span><br/>

<span>As if all sorts of noise had been</span><br/>

<span>Contracted into one loud din;</span><br/>

<span>Or that some member to be chosen,</span><br/>

<span>Had got the odds above a thousand,                            570</span><br/>

<span>And by the greatness of its noise,</span><br/>

<span>Prov'd fittest for his country's choice.</span><br/>

<span>This strange surprisal put the Knight</span><br/>

<span>And wrathful Squire into a fright;</span><br/>

<span>And though they stood prepar'd, with fatal                    575</span><br/>

<span>Impetuous rancour to join battel,</span><br/>

<span>Both thought it was the wisest course</span><br/>

<span>To wave the fight and mount to horse,</span><br/>

<span>And to secure by swift retreating,</span><br/>

<span>Themselves from danger of worse beating.                      580</span><br/>

<span>Yet neither of them would disparage,</span><br/>

<span>By utt'ring of his mind, his courage,</span><br/>

<span>Which made them stoutly keep their ground,</span><br/>

<span>With horror and disdain wind-bound.</span><br/>
</p>

<p>
<span>And now the cause of all their fear                           585</span><br/>

<span>By slow degrees approach'd so near,</span><br/>

<span>They might distinguish different noise</span><br/>

<span>Of horns, and pans, and dogs, and boys,</span><br/>

<span>And kettle-drums, whose sullen dub</span><br/>

<span>Sounds like the hooping of a tub.                             590</span><br/>

<span>But when the sight appear'd in view,</span><br/>

<span>They found it was an antique show;</span><br/>

<span>A triumph, that, for pomp and state,</span><br/>

<span>Did proudest Romans emulate:</span><br/>

<span>For as the aldermen of Rome                                   595</span><br/>

<span>Their foes at training overcome,</span><br/>

<span>And not enlarging territory,</span><br/>

<span>(As some mistaken write in Story,)</span><br/>

<span>Being mounted, in their best array,</span><br/>

<span>Upon a carr, and who but they!                                600</span><br/>

<span>And follow'd with a world of tall-lads,</span><br/>

<span>That merry ditties troll'd, and ballads,</span><br/>

<span>Did ride with many a good-morrow,</span><br/>

<span>Crying, Hey for our Town! through the Borough</span><br/>

<span>So when this triumph drew so nigh                             605</span><br/>

<span>They might particulars descry,</span><br/>

<span>They never saw two things so pat,</span><br/>

<span>In all respects, as this and that.</span><br/>

<span>First, he that led the cavalcade,</span><br/>

<span>Wore a sow-gelder's flagellate,                               610</span><br/>

<span>On which he blew as strong a levet</span><br/>

<span>As well-fee'd lawyer on his breviate,</span><br/>

<span>When over one another's heads</span><br/>

<span>They charge (three ranks at once) like Swedes,</span><br/>

<span>Next pans and kettle, of all keys,                            615</span><br/>

<span>From trebles down to double base;</span><br/>

<span>And after them, upon a nag,</span><br/>

<span>That might pass for a forehand stag,</span><br/>

<span>A cornet rode, and on his staff</span><br/>

<span>A smock display'd did proudly wave.                           620</span><br/>

<span>Then bagpipes of the loudest drones,</span><br/>

<span>With snuffling broken-winded tones,</span><br/>

<span>Whose blasts of air, in pockets shut</span><br/>

<span>Sound filthier than from the gut,</span><br/>

<span>And make a viler noise than swine                             625</span><br/>

<span>In windy weather, when they whine.</span><br/>

<span>Next one upon a pair of panniers,</span><br/>

<span>Full fraught with that which for good manners</span><br/>

<span>Shall here be nameless, mixt with grains,</span><br/>

<span>Which he dispens'd among the swains,                          630</span><br/>

<span>And busily upon the crowd</span><br/>

<span>At random round about bestow'd.</span><br/>

<span>Then, mounted on a horned horse,</span><br/>

<span>One bore a gauntlet and gilt spurs,</span><br/>

<span>Ty'd to the pummel of a long sword                            635</span><br/>

<span>He held reverst, the point turn'd downward,</span><br/>

<span>Next after, on a raw-bon'd steed,</span><br/>

<span>The conqueror's standard-bearer rid,</span><br/>

<span>And bore aloft before the champion</span><br/>

<span>A petticoat display'd, and rampant                            640</span><br/>

<span>Near whom the Amazon triumphant</span><br/>

<span>Bestrid her beast, and on the rump on't</span><br/>

<span>Sat face to tail, and bum to bum,</span><br/>

<span>The warrior whilom overcome;</span><br/>

<span>Arm'd with a spindle and a distaff,                           645</span><br/>

<span>Which, as he rode, she made him twist off;</span><br/>

<span>And when he loiter'd, o'er her shoulder</span><br/>

<span>Chastis'd the reformado soldier.</span><br/>

<span>Before the dame, and round about,</span><br/>

<span>March'd whifflers and staffiers on foot,                      650</span><br/>

<span>With lackies, grooms, valets, and pages,</span><br/>

<span>In fit and proper equipages;</span><br/>

<span>Of whom some torches bore, some links,</span><br/>

<span>Before the proud virago minx,</span><br/>

<span>That was both Madam and a Don,                                655</span><br/>

<span>Like NERO'S SPORUS, or POPE JOAN;</span><br/>

<span>And at fit periods the whole rout</span><br/>

<span>Set up their throats with clamorous shout.</span><br/>

<span>The Knight, transported, and the Squire,</span><br/>

<span>Put up their weapons, and their ire;                          660</span><br/>

<span>And HUDIBRAS, who us'd to ponder</span><br/>

<span>On such sights with judicious wonder,</span><br/>

<span>Could hold no longer to impart</span><br/>

<span>His animadversions, for his heart.</span><br/>
</p>

<p>
<span>Quoth he, In all my life, till now,                           665</span><br/>

<span>I ne'er saw so prophane a show.</span><br/>

<span>It is a Paganish invention, —</span><br/>

<span>Which heathen writers often mention:</span><br/>

<span>And he who made it had read GOODWIN,</span><br/>

<span>Or Ross, or CAELIUS RHODOGINE,                                670</span><br/>

<span>With all the Grecians, SPEEDS and STOWS,</span><br/>

<span>That best describe those ancient shows;</span><br/>

<span>And has observ'd all fit decorums</span><br/>

<span>We find describ'd by old historians:</span><br/>

<span>For as the Roman conqueror,                                   675</span><br/>

<span>That put an end to foreign war,</span><br/>

<span>Ent'ring the town in triumph for it,</span><br/>

<span>Bore a slave with him, in his chariot;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-101" id="noteref-101" epub:type="noteref">101</a></span><br/>

<span>So this insulting female brave,</span><br/>

<span>Carries behind her here a slave:                              680</span><br/>

<span>And as the ancients long ago,</span><br/>

<span>When they in field defy'd the foe,</span><br/>

<span>Hung out their mantles della guerre,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-102" id="noteref-102" epub:type="noteref">102</a></span><br/>

<span>So her proud standard-bearer here</span><br/>

<span>Waves on his spear, in dreadful manner,                       685</span><br/>

<span>A Tyrian-petticoat for banner:</span><br/>

<span>Next links and torches, heretofore<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-103" id="noteref-103" epub:type="noteref">103</a></span><br/>

<span>Still borne before the emperor.</span><br/>

<span>And as, in antique triumphs, eggs</span><br/>

<span>Were borne for mystical intrigues,                            690</span><br/>

<span>There's one with truncheon, like a ladle,</span><br/>

<span>That carries eggs too, fresh or addle;</span><br/>

<span>And still at random, as he goes,</span><br/>

<span>Among the rabble-rout bestows.</span><br/>
</p>

<p>
<span>Quoth Ralpho, You mistake the matter;                         695</span><br/>

<span>For all th' antiquity you smatter,</span><br/>

<span>Is but a riding, us'd of course</span><br/>

<span>When the grey mare's the better horse;</span><br/>

<span>When o'er the breeches greedy women</span><br/>

<span>Fight to extend their vast dominion;                          700</span><br/>

<span>And in the cause impatient Grizel</span><br/>

<span>Has drubb'd her Husband with bull's pizzle,</span><br/>

<span>And brought him under Covert-Baron,</span><br/>

<span>To turn her vassal with a murrain;</span><br/>

<span>When wives their sexes shift, like hares,                     705</span><br/>

<span>And ride their husbands like night-mares,</span><br/>

<span>And they in mortal battle vanquish'd,</span><br/>

<span>Are of their charter disenfranchis'd</span><br/>

<span>And by the right of war, like gills,</span><br/>

<span>Condemn'd to distaff, horns, and wheels:                      710</span><br/>

<span>For when men by their wives are cow'd,</span><br/>

<span>Their horns of course are understood</span><br/>
</p>

<p>
<span>Quoth HUDIBRAS thou still giv'st sentence</span><br/>

<span>Impertinently, and against sense.</span><br/>

<span>Tis not the least disparagement                               715</span><br/>

<span>To be defeated by th' event,</span><br/>

<span>Nor to be beaten by main force;</span><br/>

<span>That does not make a man the worse,</span><br/>

<span>Although his shoulders with battoon</span><br/>

<span>Be claw'd and cudgel'd to some tune.                          720</span><br/>

<span>A taylor's 'prentice has no hard</span><br/>

<span>Measure that's bang'd with a true yard:</span><br/>

<span>But to turn tail, or run away,</span><br/>

<span>And without blows give up the day,</span><br/>

<span>Or to surrender ere th' assault,                              725</span><br/>

<span>That's no man's fortune, but his fault,</span><br/>

<span>And renders men of honour less</span><br/>

<span>Than all th' adversity of success;</span><br/>

<span>And only unto such this shew</span><br/>

<span>Of horns and petticoats is due.                               730</span><br/>

<span>There is a lesser profanation,</span><br/>

<span>Like that the Romans call'd ovation:</span><br/>

<span>For as ovation was allow'd</span><br/>

<span>For conquest purchas'd without blood,</span><br/>

<span>So men decree these lesser shows                              735</span><br/>

<span>For victory gotten without blows,</span><br/>

<span>By dint of sharp hard words, which some</span><br/>

<span>Give battle with, and overcome.</span><br/>

<span>These mounted in a chair-curule,</span><br/>

<span>Which moderns call a cucking-stool,                           740</span><br/>

<span>March proudly to the river's side,</span><br/>

<span>And o'er the waves in triumph ride;</span><br/>

<span>Like Dukes of VENICE, who are said</span><br/>

<span>The Adriatick Sea to wed;</span><br/>

<span>And have a gentler wife than those                            745</span><br/>

<span>For whom the State decrees those shows,</span><br/>

<span>But both are heathenish, and come</span><br/>

<span>From th' whores of Babylon and Rome;</span><br/>

<span>And by the Saints should be withstood,</span><br/>

<span>As Antichristian and lewd;                                    750</span><br/>

<span>And as such, should now contribute</span><br/>

<span>Our utmost struggling to prohibit.</span><br/>
</p>

<p>
<span>This said, they both advanc'd, and rode</span><br/>

<span>A dog-trot through the bawling crowd,</span><br/>

<span>T'attack the leader, and still prest,                         755</span><br/>

<span>Till they approach'd him breast to breast</span><br/>

<span>Then HUDIBRAS, with face and hand,</span><br/>

<span>Made signs for silence; which obtain'd,</span><br/>

<span>What means (quoth he) this Devil's precession</span><br/>

<span>With men of orthodox profession?                              760</span><br/>

<span>'Tis ethnic and idolatrous,</span><br/>

<span>From heathenism deriv'd to us,</span><br/>

<span>Does not the Whore of Babylon ride</span><br/>

<span>Upon her horned beast astride</span><br/>

<span>Like this proud dame, who either is                           765</span><br/>

<span>A type of her, or she of this?</span><br/>

<span>Are things of superstitious function</span><br/>

<span>Fit to be us'd in Gospel Sun-shine?</span><br/>

<span>It is an Antichristian opera,</span><br/>

<span>Much us'd in midnight times of Popery,                        770</span><br/>

<span>Of running after self-inventions</span><br/>

<span>Of wicked and profane intentions;</span><br/>

<span>To scandalize that sex for scolding,</span><br/>

<span>To whom the Saints are so beholden.</span><br/>

<span>Women, who were our first Apostles                            775</span><br/>

<span>Without whose aid we had been lost else;</span><br/>

<span>Women, that left no stone unturn'd</span><br/>

<span>In which the Cause might he concern'd;</span><br/>

<span>Brought in their children's' spoons and whistles,</span><br/>

<span>To purchase swords, carbines, and pistols;                    780</span><br/>

<span>Their husbands, cullies, and sweet-hearts,</span><br/>

<span>To take the Saints and Churches' parts;</span><br/>

<span>Drew several gifted Brethren in,</span><br/>

<span>That for the Bishops would have been,</span><br/>

<span>And fix'd 'em constant to the party,                          785</span><br/>

<span>With motives powerful and hearty;</span><br/>

<span>Their husbands robb'd, and made hard shifts</span><br/>

<span>T'administer unto their gifts</span><br/>

<span>All they cou'd rap, and rend, and pilfer,</span><br/>

<span>To scraps and ends of gold and silver;                        790</span><br/>

<span>Rubb'd down the Teachers, tir'd and spent</span><br/>

<span>With holding forth for Parliament,</span><br/>

<span>Pamper'd and edify'd their zeal</span><br/>

<span>With marrow-puddings many a meal;</span><br/>

<span>And led them, with store of meat,                             795</span><br/>

<span>On controverted points to eat;</span><br/>

<span>And cram'd 'em, till their guts did ake,</span><br/>

<span>With cawdle, custard, and plum-cake:</span><br/>

<span>What have they done, or what left undone,</span><br/>

<span>That might advance the Cause at London?                       800</span><br/>

<span>March'd rank and file, with drum and ensign,</span><br/>

<span>T'intrench the city for defence in</span><br/>

<span>Rais'd rampiers with their own soft hands,</span><br/>

<span>To put the enemy to stands;</span><br/>

<span>From ladies down to oyster-wenches,                           805</span><br/>

<span>Labour'd like pioneers in trenches;</span><br/>

<span>Fell to their pick-axes, and tools,</span><br/>

<span>And help'd the men to dig like moles?</span><br/>

<span>Have not the handmaids of the city</span><br/>

<span>Chose of their members a committee,                           810</span><br/>

<span>For raising of a common purse</span><br/>

<span>Out of their wages to raise horse?</span><br/>

<span>And do they not as triers sit,</span><br/>

<span>To judge what officers are fit</span><br/>

<span>Have they —? At that an egg let fly,                         815</span><br/>

<span>Hit him directly o'er the eye,</span><br/>

<span>And running down his cheek, besmear'd,</span><br/>

<span>With orange tawny slime, his beard;</span><br/>

<span>But beard and slime being of one hue,</span><br/>

<span>The wound the less appear'd in view.                          820</span><br/>

<span>Then he that on the panniers rode,</span><br/>

<span>Let fly on th' other side a load,</span><br/>

<span>And, quickly charg'd again, gave fully</span><br/>

<span>In RALPHO'S face another volley.</span><br/>

<span>The Knight was startled with the smell,                       825</span><br/>

<span>And for his sword began to feel;</span><br/>

<span>And RALPHO, smother'd with the stink,</span><br/>

<span>Grasp'd his; when one, that bore a link,</span><br/>

<span>O' th' sudden clapp'd his flaming cudgel,</span><br/>

<span>Like linstock, to the horse's touch-hole;                     830</span><br/>

<span>And straight another, with his flambeaux,</span><br/>

<span>Gave RALPHO'S o'er the eye a damn'd blow.</span><br/>

<span>The beasts began to kick and fling,</span><br/>

<span>And forc'd the rout to make a ring,</span><br/>

<span>Through which they quickly broke their way,                   835</span><br/>

<span>And brought them off from further fray;</span><br/>

<span>And though disorder'd in retreat,</span><br/>

<span>Each of them stoutly kept his seat</span><br/>

<span>For quitting both their swords and reins,</span><br/>

<span>They grasp'd with all their strength the manes,               840</span><br/>

<span>And, to avoid the foe's pursuit,</span><br/>

<span>With spurring put their cattle to't;</span><br/>

<span>And till all four were out of wind,</span><br/>

<span>And danger too, ne'er look'd behind.</span><br/>

<span>After th' had paus'd a while, supplying                       845</span><br/>

<span>Their spirits, spent with fight and flying,</span><br/>

<span>And HUDIBRAS recruited force</span><br/>

<span>Of lungs, for action or discourse,</span><br/>
</p>

<p>
<span>Quoth he, That man is sure to lose</span><br/>

<span>That fouls his hands with dirty foes:                         850</span><br/>

<span>For where no honour's to be gain'd,</span><br/>

<span>'Tis thrown away in b'ing maintain'd.</span><br/>

<span>'Twas ill for us we had to do</span><br/>

<span>With so dishonourable a foe:</span><br/>

<span>For though the law of arms doth bar                           855</span><br/>

<span>The use of venom'd shot in war,</span><br/>

<span>Yet, by the nauseous smell, and noisome,</span><br/>

<span>Their case-shot savours strong of poison;</span><br/>

<span>And doubtless have been chew'd with teeth</span><br/>

<span>Of some that had a stinking breath;                           860</span><br/>

<span>Else, when we put it to the push,</span><br/>

<span>They have not giv'n us such a brush.</span><br/>

<span>But as those pultroons, that fling dirt,</span><br/>

<span>Do but defile, but cannot hurt,</span><br/>

<span>So all the honour they have won,                              865</span><br/>

<span>Or we have lost, is much as one,</span><br/>

<span>'Twas well we made so resolute</span><br/>

<span>And brave retreat without pursuit;</span><br/>

<span>For if we had not, we had sped</span><br/>

<span>Much worse, to be in triumph led;                             870</span><br/>

<span>Than which the ancients held no state</span><br/>

<span>Of man's life more unfortunate.</span><br/>

<span>But if this bold adventure e'er</span><br/>

<span>Do chance to reach the widow's ear,</span><br/>

<span>It may, b'ing destin'd to assert                              875</span><br/>

<span>Her sex's honour, reach her heart:</span><br/>

<span>And as such homely treats (they say)</span><br/>

<span>Portend good fortune, so this may.</span><br/>

<span>VESPASIAN being daub'd with dirt,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-104" id="noteref-104" epub:type="noteref">104</a></span><br/>

<span>Was destin'd to the empire for't;                             880</span><br/>

<span>And from a Scavenger did come</span><br/>

<span>To be a mighty Prince in Rome</span><br/>

<span>And why may not this foul address</span><br/>

<span>Presage in love the same success</span><br/>

<span>Then let us straight, to cleanse our wounds,                  885</span><br/>

<span>Advance in quest of nearest ponds,</span><br/>

<span>And after (as we first design'd)</span><br/>

<span>Swear I've perform'd what she enjoin'd.</span><br/>
</p>
			</blockquote></section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
