<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Canto III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="canto-3-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
					</h3>
					<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse">
						<header>
							<p>The Argument</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>The Knight and squire’s prodigious Flight</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To quit th’ inchanted Bow’r by Night.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He plods to turn his amorous Suit</span>
							<br/>
							<span>T’ a Plea in Law, and prosecute</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Repairs to Counsel, to advise</span>
							<br/>
							<span>‘Bout managing the Enterprise;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But first resolves to try by Letter,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And one more fair Address, to get her.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</header>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>WHO wou’d believe what strange bugbears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mankind creates itself of fears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That spring like fern, that insect weed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Equivocally, without seed;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And have no possible foundation,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But merely in th’ imagination;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yet can do more dreadful feats</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than hags, with all their imps and teats<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-198" id="noteref-198" epub:type="noteref">198</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Make more bewitch and haunt themselves</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than all their nurseries of elves?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For fear does things so like a witch,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis hard t’ unriddle which is which:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sets up Communities of senses,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To chop and change intelligences;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As Rosicrucian virtuosos<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-199" id="noteref-199" epub:type="noteref">199</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can see with ears, and hear with noses;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when they neither see nor hear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have more than both supply’d by fear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That makes ’em in the dark see visions,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And hag themselves with apparitions;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when their eyes discover least,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Discern the subtlest objects best</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do things not contrary, alone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To th’ course of nature, but its own;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The courage of the bravest daunt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And turn poltroons as valiant:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For men as resolute appear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With too much as too little fear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when they’re out of hopes of flying,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will run away from death by dying;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or turn again to stand it out,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And those they fled, like lions, rout.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This HUDIBRAS had prov’d too true,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who, by the furies left perdue,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And haunted with detachments, sent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From Marshal Legion’s regiment,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-200" id="noteref-200" epub:type="noteref">200</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was by a fiend, as counterfeit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Reliev’d and rescu’d with a cheat;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When nothing but himself, and fear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was both the imp and conjurer;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As, by the rules o’ th’ virtuosi,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It follows in due form of poesie.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Disguis’d in all the masks of night,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We left our champion on his flight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At blind man’s buff, to grope his way,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In equal fear of night and day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who took his dark and desp’rate course,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He knew no better than his horse;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, by an unknown Devil led,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(He knew as little whither,) fled.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He never was in greater need,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor less capacity, of speed;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Disabled, both in man and beast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To fly and run away his best;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To keep the enemy, and fear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From equal falling on his rear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And though with kicks and bangs he ply’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The further and the nearer side,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(As seamen ride with all their force,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And tug as if they row’d the horse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when the hackney sails most swift,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Believe they lag, or run a-drift,)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So, though he posted e’er so fast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His fear was greater than his haste:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For fear, though fleeter than the wind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Believes ’tis always left behind.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But when the morn began t’ appear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And shift t’ another scene his fear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He found his new officious shade,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That came so timely to his aid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And forc’d him from the foe t’ escape,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had turn’d itself to RALPHO’s shape;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So like in person, garb, and pitch,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Twas hard t’ interpret which was which.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>For RALPHO had no sooner told</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Lady all he had t’ unfold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But she convey’d him out of sight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To entertain the approaching Knight;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, while he gave himself diversion,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>T’ accommodate his beast and person,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And put his beard into a posture</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At best advantage to accost her,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She order’d th’ anti-masquerade</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(For his reception) aforesaid:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But when the ceremony was done,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The lights put out, and furies gone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And HUDIBRAS, among the rest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Convey’d away, as RALPHO guess’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The wretched caitiff, all alone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(As he believ’d) began to moan,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And tell his story to himself,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Knight mistook him for an elf;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And did so still till he began</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To scruple at RALPH’s Outward Man;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thought, because they oft agreed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>T’ appear in one another’s stead,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And act the Saint’s and Devil’s part</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With undistinguishable art,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They might have done so now, perhaps,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And put on one another’s shapes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And therefore, to resolve the doubt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He star’d upon him, and cry’d out,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What art? My ‘Squire, or that bold Sprite</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That took his place and shape to-night?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some busy indepenent pug,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Retainer to his Synagogue?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Alas! quoth he, I’m none of those,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your bosom friends, as you suppose;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But RALPH himself, your trusty ‘Squire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wh’ has dragg’d your Dunship out o’ th’ mire,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And from th’ inchantments of a widow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wh’ had turn’d you int’ a beast, have freed you;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, though a prisoner of war,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have brought you safe where you now are;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which you would gratefully repay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your constant Presbyterian way.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>That’s stranger (quoth the Knight) and stranger.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who gave thee notice of my danger?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth he, Th’ infernal Conjurer</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pursu’d and took me prisoner;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And knowing you were hereabout,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Brought me along to find you out;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where I, in hugger-mugger hid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have noted all they said or did:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And though they lay to him the pageant,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I did not see him, nor his agent;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who play’d their sorceries out of sight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>T’ avoid a fiercer second fight.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But didst thou see no Devils then?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not one (quoth he) but carnal men,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A little worse than fiends in hell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that She-Devil Jezebel,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That laugh’d and tee-he’d with derision,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To see them take your deposition.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>What then (quoth HUDIBRAS) was he</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That play’d the Dev’l to examine me?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A rallying weaver in the town,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That did it in a parson’s gown;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom all the parish take for gifted;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, for my part, I ne’er believ’d it:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In which you told them all your feats,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your conscientious frauds and cheats;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deny’d your whipping, and confest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The naked truth of all the rest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More plainly than the Rev’rend Writer,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-201" id="noteref-201" epub:type="noteref">201</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>That to our Churches veil’d his Mitre;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All which they took in black and white,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And cudgell’d me to under-write.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>What made thee, when they all were gone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And none but thou and I alone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To act the Devil, and forbear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To rid me of my hellish fear?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth he, I knew your constant rate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And frame of sp’rit too obstinate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be by me prevail’d upon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With any motives of my own;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And therefore strove to counterfeit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Dev’l a-while, to nick your wit;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Devil, that is your constant crony,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That only can prevail upon ye;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Else we might still have been disputing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And they with weighty drubs confuting.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The Knight who now began to find</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ had left the enemy behind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And saw no farther harm remain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But feeble weariness and pain;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Perceiv’d, by losing of their way,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ had gain’d th’ advantage of the day;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, by declining of the road,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They had, by chance, their rear made good;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He ventur’d to dismiss his fear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That parting’s wont to rent and tear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And give the desperat’st attack</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To danger still behind its back.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For having paus’d to recollect,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And on his past success reflect,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>T’ examine and consider why,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And whence, and how, they came to fly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when no Devil had appear’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What else, it cou’d be said, he fear’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It put him in so fierce a rage,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He once resolv’d to re-engage;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Toss’d like a foot-ball back again,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With shame and vengeance, and disdain.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quoth he, it was thy cowardice</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That made me from this leaguer rise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when I’d half reduc’d the place,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To quit it infamously base</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was better cover’d by the new</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Arriv’d detachment then I knew;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To slight my new acquests, and run</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Victoriously from battles won;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And reck’ning all I gain’d or lost,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To sell them cheaper than they cost;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make me put myself to flight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And conqu’ring run away by night</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To drag me out, which th’ haughty foe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Durst never have presum’d to do</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To mount me in the dark, by force,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon the bare ridge of my horse;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Expos’d in querpo to their rage,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Without my arms and equipage;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lest, if they ventur’d to pursue,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I might th’ unequal fight renew;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, to preserve thy Outward Man,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Assum’d my place, and led the van.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>All this quoth RALPH, I did, ’tis true,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not to preserve my self, but you;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You, who were damn’d to baser drubs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than wretches feel in powd’ring tubs.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To mount two-wheel’d carroches, worse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than managing a wooden-horse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dragg’d out through straiter holes by th’ ears,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Eras’d or coup’d for perjurers;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who, though th’ attempt had prov’d in vain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had had no reason to complain:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But since it prosper’d, ’tis unhandsome</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To blame the hand that paid our ransome,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And rescu’d your obnoxious bones</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From unavoidable battoons.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The enemy was reinforc’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And we disabled, and unhors’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Disarm’d, unqualify’d for fight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And no way left but hasty flight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which though as desp’rate in th’ attempt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Has giv’n you freedom to condemn’t.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But were our bones in fit condition</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To reinforce the expedition,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis now unseasonable, and vain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To think of falling on again.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No martial project to surprize</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can ever be attempted twice;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor cast design serve afterwards,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As gamesters tear their losing-cards,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beside, our bangs of man and beast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are fit for nothing now but rest;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And for a-while will not be able</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To rally, and prove serviceable;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And therefore I, with reason, chose</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This stratagem t’ amuse our foes;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make an honourable retreat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And wave a total sure defeat;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For those that fly may fight again,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which he can never do that’s slain.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hence timely running’s no mean part</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of conduct in the martial art;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By which some glorious feats atchieve,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As citizens by breaking thrive;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And cannons conquer armies, while</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They seem to draw off and recoil;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is held the gallantest course, and bravest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To great exploits, as well as safest;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That spares th’ expence of time and pains,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And dangerous beating out of brains;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in the end prevails as certain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As those that never trust to fortune;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But make their fear do execution</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beyond the stoutest resolution;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As earthquakes kill without a blow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, only trembling, overthrow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If th’ ancients crown’d their bravest men<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-202" id="noteref-202" epub:type="noteref">202</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>That only sav’d a citizen,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What victory could e’er be won,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If ev’ry one would save but one</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or fight endanger’d to be lost,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where all resolve to save the most?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By this means, when a battle’s won,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The war’s as far from being done;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For those that save themselves, and fly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Go halves, at least, i’ th’ victory;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And sometimes, when the loss is small,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And danger great, they challenge all;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Print new additions to their feats,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And emendations in Gazettes;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when, for furious haste to run,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They durst not stay to fire a gun,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have done’t with bonfires, and at home</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made squibs and crackers overcome;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To set the rabble on a flame,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And keep their governors from blame;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Disperse the news the pulpit tells,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Confirm’d with fire-works and with bells;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And though reduc’d to that extream,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They have been forc’d to sing Te Deum;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet, with religious blasphemy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By flattering Heaven with a lie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And for their beating giving thanks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ have rais’d recruits, and fill’d their banks;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For those who run from th’ enemy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Engage them equally to fly;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when the fight becomes a chace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those win the day that win the race</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that which would not pass in fights,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Has done the feat with easy flights;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Recover’d many a desp’rate campaign</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With Bordeaux, Burgundy, and Champaign;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Restor’d the fainting high and mighty</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With brandy-wine and aqua-vitae;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And made ’em stoutly overcome</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With bachrach, hoccamore, and mum;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom the uncontroul’d decrees of fate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To victory necessitate;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With which, although they run or burn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They unavoidably return:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or else their sultan populaces</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still strangle all their routed Bassas.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-203" id="noteref-203" epub:type="noteref">203</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth HUDIBRAS, I understand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What fights thou mean’st at sea and land,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And who those were that run away,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yet gave out th’ had won the day;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Although the rabble sous’d them for’t,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O’er head and ears in mud and dirt.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis true, our modern way of war</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is grown more politick by far,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But not so resolute, and bold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor ty’d to honour, as the old.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For now they laugh at giving battle,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unless it be to herds of cattle;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or fighting convoys of provision,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The whole design o’ the expedition:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And not with downright blows to rout</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The enemy, but eat them out:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As fighting, in all beasts of prey,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And eating, are perform’d one way,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To give defiance to their teeth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And fight their stubborn guts to death;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And those atchieve the high’st renown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That bring the others’ stomachs down,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There’s now no fear of wounds, nor maiming;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All dangers are reduc’d to famine;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And feats of arms, to plot, design,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Surprize, and stratagem, and mine;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But have no need nor use of courage,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unless it be for glory or forage:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For if they fight, ’tis but by chance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When one side vent’ring to advance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And come uncivilly too near,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are charg’d unmercifully i’ th’ rear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And forc’d with terrible resistance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To keep hereafter at a distance;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To pick out ground to incamp upon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where store of largest rivers run,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That serve, instead of peaceful barriers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To part th’ engagements of their warriors;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where both from side to side may skip,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And only encounter at bo-peep:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For men are found the stouter-hearted,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The certainer th’ are to be parted,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And therefore post themselves in bogs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As th’ ancient mice attack’d the frogs,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-204" id="noteref-204" epub:type="noteref">204</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And made their mortal enemy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The water-rat, their strict ally.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For ’tis not now, who’s stout and bold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But who bears hunger best, and cold;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And he’s approv’d the most deserving,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who longest can hold out at starving;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And he that routs most pigs and cows,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The formidablest man of prowess.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So th’ emperor CALIGULA,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That triumph’d o’er the British Sea,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Took crabs and oysters prisoners,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lobsters, ‘stead of cuirasiers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Engag’d his legions in fierce bustles</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With periwinkles, prawns, and muscles;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And led his troops with furious gallops,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To charge whole regiments of scallops</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not like their ancient way of war,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To wait on his triumphal carr</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But when he went to dine or sup</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More bravely eat his captives up;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And left all war, by his example,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Reduc’d to vict’ling of a camp well.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth RALPH, By all that you have said,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And twice as much that I cou’d add,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis plain you cannot now do worse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than take this out-of-fashion’d course;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To hope, by stratagem, to woo her,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or waging battle to subdue her</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though some have done it in romances,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And bang’d them into amorous fancies;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As those who won the AMAZONS,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By wanton drubbing of their bones;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And stout Rinaldo gain’d his bride,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-205" id="noteref-205" epub:type="noteref">205</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>By courting of her back and side.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But since those times and feats are over,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They are not for a modern lover,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When mistresses are too cross-grain’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By such addresses to be gain’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And if they were, wou’d have it out</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With many another kind of bout.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Therefore I hold no course s’ infeasible,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As this of force to win the JEZEBEL;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To storm her heart, by th’ antick charms</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of ladies errant, force of arms;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But rather strive by law to win her,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And try the title you have in her.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your case is clear; you have her word,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And me to witness the accord</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Besides two more of her retinue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To testify what pass’d between you;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More probable, and like to hold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than hand, or seal, or breaking gold;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For which so many, that renounc’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their plighted contracts, have been trounc’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And bills upon record been found,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That forc’d the ladies to compound;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that, unless I miss the matter,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is all the bus’ness you look after.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Besides, encounters at the bar</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are braver now than those in war,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In which the law does execution</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With less disorder and confusion</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Has more of honour in’t, some hold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not like the new way, but the old</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When those the pen had drawn together,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Decided quarrels with the feather,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And winged arrows kill’d as dead,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And more than bullets now of lead.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So all their combats now, as then,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are manag’d chiefly by the pen;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That does the feat with braver vigours,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In words at length, as well as figures;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is judge of all the world performs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In voluntary feats of arms</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And whatsoe’er’s atchiev’d in fight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Determines which is wrong or right:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For whether you prevail, or lose</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All must be try’d there in the close;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And therefore ’tis not wise to shun</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What you must trust to ere y’ have done.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The law, that settles all you do,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And marries where you did but woo;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That makes the most perfidious lover</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A lady, that’s as false, recover;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And if it judge upon your side,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will soon extend her for your bride;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And put her person, goods, or lands,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or which you like best int’ your hands.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>For law’s the wisdom of all ages,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And manag’d by the ablest sages;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who, though their bus’ness at the bar</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be but a kind of civil war,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In which th’ engage with fiercer dudgeons</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than e’er the GRECIANS did and TROJANS,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They never manage the contest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>T’ impair their public interest;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or by their controversies lessen</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The dignity of their profession:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not like us Brethren, who divide</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our Commonwealth, the Cause, and Side;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And though w’ are all as near of kindred</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As th’ outward man is to the inward,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We agree in nothing, but to wrangle</span>
						<br/>
						<span>About the slightest fingle-fangle;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While lawyers have more sober sense</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than t’ argue at their own expence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But make their best advantages</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of others’ quarrels, like the Swiss;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, out of foreign controversies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By aiding both sides, fill their purses;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But have no int’rest in the cause</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For which th’ engage, and wage the laws;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor further prospect than their pay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether they lose or win the day:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And though th’ abounded in all ages,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With sundry learned clerks and sages,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though all their business be dispute,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which way they canvass ev’ry suit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ have no disputes about their art,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor in Polemicks controvert:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While all professions else are found</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With nothing but disputes t’ abound</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Divines of all sorts, and physicians,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Philosophers, mathematicians:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Galenist and Paracelsian</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Condemn the way each other deals in:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Anatomists dissect and mangle,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To cut themselves out work to wrangle</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Astrologers dispute their dreams,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That in their sleeps they talk of schemes:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And heralds stickle, who got who</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So many hundred years ago.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But lawyers are too wise a nation</span>
						<br/>
						<span>T’ expose their trade to disputation;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or make the busy rabble judges</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all their secret piques and grudges;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In which whoever wins the day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The whole profession’s sure to pay.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beside, no mountebanks, nor cheats,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dare undertake to do their feats,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When in all other sciences</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They swarm, like insects, and increase.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>For what bigot durst ever draw,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By inward light, a deed in law?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or could hold forth, by revelation,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An answer to a declaration?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For those that meddle with their tools</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will cut their fingers, if they’re fools;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And if you follow their advice,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In bills, and answers, and replies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They’ll write a love-letter in chancery,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall bring her upon oath to answer ye,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And soon reduce her to b’ your wife,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or make her weary of her life.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The Knight, who us’d with tricks and shifts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To edify by RALPHO’s Gifts,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But in appearance cry’d him down,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make them better seem his own,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(All Plagiaries’ constant course</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of sinking when they take a purse),</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Resolv’d to follow his advice,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But kept it from him by disguise;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, after stubborn contradiction,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To counterfeit his own conviction,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And by transition fall upon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The resolution as his own.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth he, This gambol thou advisest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is of all others the unwisest;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For if I think by law to gain her,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There’s nothing sillier or vainer</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis but to hazard my pretence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where nothing’s certain, but th’ expence;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To act against myself, and traverse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My suit and title, to her favours</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And if she shou’d (which Heav’n forbid)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O’erthrow me, as the fidler did,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What aftercourse have I to take,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Gainst losing all I have at stake?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He that with injury is griev’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And goes to law to be reliev’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is sillier than a sottish chowse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who, when thief has robb’d his house,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Applies himself to cunning men,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To help him to his goods agen;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When all he can expect to gain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is but to squander more in vain;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yet I have no other way</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But is as difficult to play.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For to reduce her by main force,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is now in vain; by fair means, worse;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But worst of all, to give her over,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>‘Till she’s as desp’rate to recover</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For bad games are thrown up too soon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Until th’ are never to be won.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But since I have no other course,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But is as bad t’ attempt, or worse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He that complies against his will,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is of his own opinion still;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which he may adhere to, yet disown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For reasons to himself best known:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But ’tis not to b’ avoided now,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For SIDROPHEL resolves to sue;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom I must answer, or begin</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Inevitably first with him.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For I’ve receiv’d advertisement,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By times enough, of his intent;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And knowing he that first complains</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ advantage of the business gains;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For Courts of Justice understand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The plaintiff to be eldest hand;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who what he pleases may aver;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The other, nothing, till he swear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is freely admitted to all grace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And lawful favour, by his place;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, for his bringing custom in,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Has all advantages to win.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I, who resolve to oversee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No lucky opportunity,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will go to council, to advise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which way t’ encounter, or surprize,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, after long consideration,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have found out one to fit th’ occasion;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Most apt for what I have to do,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As counsellor and justice too.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And truly so, no doubt, he was,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A lawyer fit for such a case.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>An old dull sot, who told the clock<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-206" id="noteref-206" epub:type="noteref">206</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>For many years at Bridewell-dock,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At Westminster, and Hicks’s-Hall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Hiccius Doctius play’d in all;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where, in all governments and times,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>H’ had been both friend and foe to crimes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And us’d two equal ways of gaining</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By hind’ring justice or maintaining;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To many a whore gave priviledge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And whipp’d for want of quarteridge:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cart-loads of bawds to prison sent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For b’ing behind a fortnight’s rent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And many a trusty pimp and croney</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To Puddle-dock for want of money;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-207" id="noteref-207" epub:type="noteref">207</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Engag’d the constable to seize</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All those that would not break the peace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor give him back his own foul words,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though sometimes Commoners or Lords,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And kept ’em prisoners of course,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For being sober at ill hours;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That in the morning he might free</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or bind ’em over for his fee;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made monsters fine, and puppet-plays,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-208" id="noteref-208" epub:type="noteref">208</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>For leave to practise in their ways;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Farm’d out all cheats, and went a share</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With th’ headborough and scavenger;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And made the dirt i’ th’ streets compound</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For taking up the publick ground;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The kennel, and the King’s highway,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For being unmolested, pay;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let out the stocks, and whipping-post,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And cage, to those that gave him most;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Impos’d a tax on bakers’ ears,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And for false weights on chandelers;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made victuallers and vintners fine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For arbitrary ale and wine;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But was a kind and constant friend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To all that regularly offend;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As residentiary bawds,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And brokers that receive stol’n goods;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That cheat in lawful mysteries,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And pay church duties and his fees;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But was implacable, and awkward,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To all that interlop’d and hawker’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To this brave man the Knight repairs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For council in his law-affairs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And found him mounted in his pew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With books and money plac’d for shew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like nest-eggs to make clients lay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And for his false opinion pay</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To whom the knight, with comely grace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Put off his hat to put his case</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which he as proudly entertain’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As th’ other courteously strain’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, to assure him ‘t was not that</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He look’d for, bid him put on’s hat.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Quoth he, There is one SIDROPHEL,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom I have cudgell’d⁠—Very well.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And now he brags t’ have beaten me. —</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Better and better still, quoth he. —</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And vows to stick me to a wall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where-e’er he meets me⁠—Best of all.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis true, the knave has taken’s oath</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I robb’d him⁠—Well done, in troth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When h’ has confess’d he stole my cloak,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And pick’d my fob, and what he took;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which was the cause that made me bang him,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And take my goods again⁠—Marry hang him.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now whether I should before-hand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Swear he robb’d me?⁠—I understand.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or bring my action of conversion</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And trover for my goods?⁠—Ah, Whoreson!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or if ’tis better to indite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And bring him to his trial?⁠—Right.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prevent what he designs to do,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And swear for th’ State against him?⁠—True.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or whether he that is defendant</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In this case has the better end on’t;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who, putting in a new cross-bill,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>May traverse th’ action?⁠—Better still.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then there’s a Lady too⁠—Aye, marry</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That’s easily prov’d accessary;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A widow, who, by solemn vows</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Contracted to me for my spouse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Combin’d with him to break her word,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And has abetted all. — Good Lord</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Suborn’d th’ aforesaid SIDROPHEL</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To tamper with the Dev’l of Hell;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who put m’ into a horrid fear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fear of my life. — Make that appear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made an assault with fiends and men</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon my body. — Good agen,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And kept me in a deadly fright,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And false imprisonment, all night</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mean while they robb’d me, and my horse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And stole my saddle. — Worse and worse.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And made me mount upon the bare ridge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>T’ avoid a wretcheder miscarriage.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Sir, quoth the Lawyer, not to flatter ye,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You have as good and fair a battery</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As heart can wish, and need not shame</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The proudest man alive to claim.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For if th’ have us’d you as you say;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Marry, quoth I, God give you joy.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I wou’d it were my case, I’d give</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More than I’ll say, or you’ll believe.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I would so trounce her, and her purse;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’d make her kneel for better or worse;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For matrimony and hanging here</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both go by destiny so clear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That you as sure may pick and choose,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As Cross, I win; and, Pile, you lose;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, if I durst, I would advance</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As much in ready maintenance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As upon any case I’ve known,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But we that practise dare not own.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The law severely contrabands</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our taking bus’ness off men’s hands;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Tis common barratry, that bears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Point-blank an action ’gainst our ears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And crops them till there is not leather</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To stick a pin in left of either;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For which some do the Summer-sault,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And o’er the bar, like tumblers, vault,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But you may swear, at any rate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Things not in nature, for the State;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For in all courts of justice here</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A witness is not said to swear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But make oath; that is, in plain terms,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To forge whatever he affirms.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>(I thank you, quoth the Knight, for that,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because ’tis to my purpose pat⁠—)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For Justice, though she’s painted blind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is to the weaker Side inclin’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like Charity; else right and wrong</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Could never hold it out so long,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, like blind Fortune, with a slight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Convey mens’ interest and right</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From Stiles’s pocket into Nokes’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-209" id="noteref-209" epub:type="noteref">209</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>As easily as Hocus Pocus;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Play fast and loose; make men obnoxious,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And clear again, like Hiccius Doctius.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then whether you wou’d take her life,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or but recover her for your wife,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or be content with what she has,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And let all other matters pass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The bus’ness to the law’s alone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The proof is all it looks upon:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And you can want no witnesses</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To swear to any thing you please,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That hardly get their mere expences</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By th’ labour of their consciences;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or letting out to hire their ears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To affidavit customers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At inconsiderable values,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To serve for jury-men or tallies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Although retain’d in th’ hardest matters,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of trustees and administrators.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>For that, quoth he, let me alone;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>W’ have store of such, and all our own;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bred up and tutor’d by our teachers,</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The ablest of conscience-stretchers.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That’s well, quoth he; but I should guess,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By weighing all advantages,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your surest way is first to pitch</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On BONGEY for a water-witch;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-210" id="noteref-210" epub:type="noteref">210</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when y’ have hang’d the conjurer,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Y’ have time enough to deal with her.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In th’ int’rim, spare for no trepans</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To draw her neck into the bans</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ply her with love-letters and billets,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And bait ’em well, for quirks and quillets</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With trains t’ inveigle, and surprize,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her heedless answers and replies;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And if she miss the mouse-trap lines,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They’ll serve for other by-designs;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And make an artist understand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To copy out her seal or hand;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or find void places in the paper</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To steal in something to intrap her</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till, with her worldly goods and body,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spight of her heart, she has endow’d ye,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Retain all sorts of witnesses,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That ply i’ th’ Temple under trees;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or walk the round, with knights o’ th’ posts,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>About the cross-legg’d knights, their hosts;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or wait for customers between</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The pillars-rows in Lincoln’s-Inn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where vouchers, forgers, common-bail,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And affidavit-men, ne’er fail</span>
						<br/>
						<span>T’ expose to sale all sorts of oaths,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>According to their ears and cloaths,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their only necessary tools,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Besides the Gospel and their souls;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when y’ are furnish’d with all purveys,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I shall be ready at your service.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>I would not give, quoth HUDIBRAS,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A straw to understand a case,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Without the admirable skill</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To wind and manage it at will;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To vere, and tack, and steer a cause</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against the weather-gage of laws;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And ring the changes upon cases</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As plain as noses upon faces,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As you have well instructed me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For which you’ve earn’d (here ’tis) your fee.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I long to practise your advice,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And try the subtle artifice;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To bait a letter, as you bid;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As not long after, thus he did</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For having pump’d up all his wit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And humm’d upon it, thus he writ.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
