<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Lady’s Answer to the Knight</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="the-ladys-answer-to-the-knight" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Lady’s Answer to the Knight</h3>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>THAT you're a beast, and turn'd to grass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is no strange news, nor ever was;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At least to me, who once you know,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did from the pound replevin you,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When both your sword and spurs were won</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In combat by an Amazon.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That sword, that did (like Fate) determine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th' inevitable death of vermine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And never dealt its furious blows,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But cut the throats of pigs and cows,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By TRULLA was, in single fight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Disarm'd and wrested from its knight;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your heels degraded of your spurs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in the stocks close prisoners;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where still they'd lain, in base restraint,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If I, in pity of your complaint,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had not on honourable conditions,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Releast 'em from the worst of prisons</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And what return that favour met</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You cannot (though you wou'd) forget;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When, being free, you strove t' evade</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The oaths you had in prison made;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forswore yourself; and first deny'd it,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But after own'd and justify'd it</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when y' had falsely broke one vow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Absolv'd yourself by breaking two.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For while you sneakingly submit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And beg for pardon at our feet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Discourag'd by your guilty fears,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To hope for quarter for your ears,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And doubting 'twas in vain to sue,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You claim us boldly as your due;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Declare that treachery and force,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To deal with us, is th' only course;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We have no title nor pretence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To body, soul, or conscience;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But ought to fall to that man's share</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That claims us for his proper ware.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These are the motives which, t' induce</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or fright us into love, you use.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A pretty new way of gallanting,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Between soliciting and ranting;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like sturdy beggars, that intreat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For charity at once, and threat.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But since you undertake to prove</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your own propriety in love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if we were but lawful prize</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In war between two enemies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or forfeitures, which ev'ry lover,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That wou'd but sue for, might recover,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It is not hard to understand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The myst'ry of this bold demand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That cannot at our persons aim,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But something capable of claim.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>'Tis not those paultry counterfeit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>French stones, which in our eyes you set,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But our right diamonds, that inspire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And set your am'rous hearts on fire.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor can those false St. Martin's beads,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which on our lips you lay for reds,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And make us wear, like Indian dames,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Add fuel to your scorching flames;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But those true rubies of the rock,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which in our cabinets we lock.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>'Tis not those orient pearls our teeth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That you are so transported with;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But those we wear about our necks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Produce those amorous effects.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor is't those threads of gold, our hair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The periwigs you make us wear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But those bright guineas in our chests,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That light the wild fire in your breasts.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These love-tricks I've been vers'd in so,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That all their sly intrigues I know,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And can unriddle, by their tones,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their mystick cabals and jargones;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can tell what passions, by their sounds,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pine for the beauties of my grounds;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What raptures fond and amorous</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O' th' charms and graces of my house;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What extasy and scorching flame,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Burns for my money in my name;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What from th' unnatural desire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To beasts and cattle takes its fire;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What tender sigh, and trickling tear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Longs for a thousand pounds a year;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And languishing transports are fond</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of statute, mortgage, bill, and bond.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>These are th' attracts which most men fall</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Inamour'd, at first sight, withal</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To these th' address with serenades,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And court with balls and masquerades;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yet, for all the yearning pain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Y' have suffer'd for their loves in vain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I fear they'll prove so nice and coy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To have, and t' hold and to enjoy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That all your oaths and labour lost,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They'll ne'er turn ladies of the post.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This is not meant to disapprove</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your judgment in your choice of love;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which is so wise, the greatest part</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of mankind study 't as an art;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For love shou'd, like a deodand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still fall to th' owner of the land;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And where there's substance for its ground,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cannot but be more firm and sound</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than that which has the slightest basis</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of airy virtue, wit, and graces;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which is of such thin subtlety,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It steals and creeps in at the eye,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, as it can't endure to stay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Steals out again as nice a way.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But love, that its extraction owns</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From solid gold and precious stones</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Must, like its shining parents, prove</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As solid and as glorious love.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hence 'tis you have no way t'express</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our charms and graces but by these:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For what are lips, and eyes, and teeth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which beauty invades and conquers with,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But rubies, pearls, and diamonds,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With which a philter-love commands?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This is the way all parents prove,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In managing their childrens' love;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That force 'em t' intermarry and wed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if th' were bur'ing of the dead;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cast earth to earth, as in the grave,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To join in wedlock all they have:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when the settlement's in force,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Take all the rest for better or worse;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For money has a power above</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The stars and fate to manage love;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose arrows, learned poets hold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That never miss, are tipp'd with gold.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-217" id="noteref-217" epub:type="noteref">217</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And though some say, the parents' claims</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To make love in their childrens' names,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who many times at once provide</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The nurse, the husband, and the bride</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Feel darts and charms, attracts and flames,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And woo and contract in their names;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as they christen, use to marry 'em,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, like their gossips, answer for 'em;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is not to give in matrimony,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But sell and prostitute for money;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>'Tis better than their own betrothing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who often do't for worse than nothing;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when th' are at their own dispose,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With greater disadvantage choose.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All this is right; but for the course</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You take to do't, by fraud or force,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>'Tis so ridiculous, as soon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As told, 'tis never to be done;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No more than setters can betray,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That tell what tricks they are to play.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Marriage, at best, is but a vow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which all men either break or bow:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then what will those forbear to do,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who perjure when they do but woo?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such as before-hand swear and lie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For earnest to their treachery;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, rather than a crime confess,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With greater strive to make it less;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like thieves, who, after sentence past,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Maintain their innocence to the last;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when their crimes were made appear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As plain as witnesses can swear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet, when the wretches come to die,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will take upon their death a lie,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor are the virtues you confest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>T' your ghostly father, as you guest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So slight as to be justify'd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By being as shamefully deny'd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if you thought your word would pass</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Point-blank on both sides of a case;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or credit were not to be lost</span>
						<br/>
						<span>B' a brave Knight-Errant of the Post,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That eats perfidiously his word,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And swears his ears through a two inch board:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can own the same thing, and disown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And perjure booty, Pro and Con:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can make the Gospel serve his turn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And help him out, to be forsworn;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When 'tis laid hands upon, and kist,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be betray'd and sold like Christ.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These are the virtues in whose name</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A right to all the world you claim,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And boldly challenge a dominion,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In grace and nature, o'er all women;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of whom no less will satisfy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than all the sex your tyranny,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Although you'll find it a hard province,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With all your crafty frauds and covins,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To govern such a num'rous crew,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who, one by one, now govern you:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For if you all were SOLOMONS,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And wise and great as he was once,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You'll find they're able to subdue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(As they did him) and baffle you.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And if you are impos'd upon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>'Tis by your own temptation done,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That with your ignorance invite;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And teach us how to use the slight.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For when we find y' are still more taken</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With false attracts of our own making;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Swear that's a rose, and that a stone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like sots, to us that laid it on,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And what we did but slightly prime,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Most ignorantly daub in rhime;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You force us, in our own defences,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To copy beams and influences;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To lay perfections on the graces,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And draw attracts upon our faces;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, in compliance to your wit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your own false jewels counterfeit.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For, by the practice of those arts</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We gain a greater share of hearts;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And those deserve in reason most</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That greatest pains and study cost;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For great perfections are, like heaven,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Too rich a present to be given.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor are these master-strokes of beauty</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be perform'd without hard duty,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which, when they're nobly done and well,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The simple natural excell.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How fair and sweet the planted rose</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beyond the wild in hedges grows!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For without art the noblest seeds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of flow'rs degen'rate into weeds.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How dull and rugged, e're 'tis ground</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And polish'd, looks a diamond!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though Paradise were e'er so fair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It was not kept so without care.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The whole world, without art and dress,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would be but one great wilderness;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And mankind but a savage herd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For all that nature has conferr'd.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This does but rough-hew, and design;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Leaves art to polish and refine.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though women first were made for men,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet men were made for them agen;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For when (outwitted by his wife)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Man first turn'd tenant but for life,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If women had not interven'd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How soon had mankind had an end!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that it is in being yet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To us alone you are in debt.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And where's your liberty of choice,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And our unnatural No Voice?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Since all the privilege you boast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And falsly usurp'd, or vainly lost,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is now our right; to whose creation</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You owe your happy restoration:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And if we had not weighty cause</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To not appear, in making laws,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We could, in spite of all your tricks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And shallow, formal politicks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Force you our managements t' obey,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As we to yours (in shew) give way.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hence 'tis that, while you vainly strive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>T' advance your high prerogative,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You basely, after all your braves,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Submit, and own yourselves our slaves;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And 'cause we do not make it known,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor publickly our int'rest own,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like sots, suppose we have no shares</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In ord'ring you and your affairs;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When all your empire and command</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You have from us at second hand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if a pilot, that appears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To sit still only while he steers,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And does not make a noise and stir</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like ev'ry common mariner,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Knew nothing of the card, nor star,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And did not guide the man of war;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor we, because we don't appear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In councils, do not govern there;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While, like the mighty PRESTER JOHN,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-218" id="noteref-218" epub:type="noteref">218</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose person none dares look upon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But is preserv'd in close disguise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From being made cheap to vulgar eyes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>W' enjoy as large a pow'r unseen,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To govern him, as he does men;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in the right of our Pope JOAN,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Make Emp'rors at our feet fall down;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or JOAN DE PUCEL'S braver name,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-219" id="noteref-219" epub:type="noteref">219</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our right to arms and conduct claim;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who, though a Spinster, yet was able</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To serve FRANCE for a Grand Constable.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>We make and execute all laws;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can judge the judges and the cause;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prescribe all rules of right or wrong</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To th' long robe, and the longer tongue;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>'Gainst which the world has no defence;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But our more pow'rful eloquence.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We manage things of greatest weight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In all the world's affairs of state</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are ministers of war and peace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That sway all nations how we please.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We rule all churches and their flocks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Heretical and orthodox;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And are the heavenly vehicles</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O' th' spirits in all conventicles.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By us is all commerce and trade</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Improv'd, and manag'd, and decay'd;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For nothing can go off so well,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor bears that price, as what we sell.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We rule in ev'ry publique meeting,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And make men do what we judge fitting;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are magistrates in all great towns,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where men do nothing but wear gowns.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We make the man of war strike sail,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to our braver conduct veil,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, when h' has chac'd his enemies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Submit to us upon his knees.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is there an officer of state</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Untimely rais'd, or magistrate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That's haughty and imperious?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He's but a journeyman to us.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That as he gives us cause to do't,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can keep him in, or turn him out.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>We are your guardians, that increase</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or waste your fortunes how we please;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, as you humour us, can deal</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In all your matters, ill or well.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>'Tis we that can dispose alone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whether your heirs shall be your own,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To whose integrity you must,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In spight of all your caution, trust;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, 'less you fly beyond the seas,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can fit you with what heirs we please;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And force you t' own 'em, though begotten</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By French Valets or Irish Footmen.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor can the vigorousest course</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Prevail, unless to make us worse;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who still, the harsher we are us'd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are further off from b'ing reduc'd;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And scorn t' abate, for any ills,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The least punctilios of our wills.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Force does but whet our wits t' apply</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Arts, born with us, for remedy;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which all your politicks, as yet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have ne'er been able to defeat:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For when y' have try'd all sorts of ways,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What fools d' we make of you in plays!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While all the favours we afford,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Are but to girt you with the sword,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To fight our battles in our steads,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And have your brains beat out o' your heads;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Encounter, in despite of nature,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And fight at once, with fire and water,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With pirates, rocks, and storms, and seas,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our pride and vanity t' appease;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Kill one another, and cut throats,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For our good graces, and best thoughts;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To do your exercise for honour,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And have your brains beat out the sooner;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or crack'd, as learnedly, upon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Things that are never to be known;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And still appear the more industrious,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The more your projects are prepost'rous;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To square the circle of the arts,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And run stark mad to shew your parts;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Expound the oracle of laws,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And turn them which way we see cause</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be our solicitors and agents,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And stand for us in all engagements.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And these are all the mighty pow'rs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You vainly boast to cry down ours;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And what in real value's wanting,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Supply with vapouring and ranting;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because yourselves are terrify'd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And stoop to one another's pride,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Believe we have as little wit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be out-hector'd, and submit;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By your example, lose that right</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In treaties which we gain'd in fight;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, terrify'd into an awe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pass on ourselves a Salique law:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-220" id="noteref-220" epub:type="noteref">220</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Or, as some nations use, give place,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And truckle to your mighty race;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let men usurp th' unjust dominion,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As if they were the better women.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
